uasifum Physics 


A User's Manual 











A User's Manual 


Michael A. Morrison 

University of Oklahoma 


? \ .T" \ 

l / j 

\ • ' . , . / 


v 








Prentice-Hall International, Inc. 



This edition may be sold only in those countries to which 
it is consigned by Prentice-Hall International. It is not to 
be re-exported and it is not for sale in the U.S.A., Mexico, 
or Canada. 



©1990 by Prentice-Hall, Inc. 

A Division of Simon & Schuster 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reproduced, in any form or by any means, 
without permission in writing from the publisher. 


Printed in the United States of America 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 I 


ISBN 0-13-^35^76-^ 


Prentice-Hall International (UK) Limited, London 
Prentice-Hall of Australia Ply. Limited, Sydney 
Prinlice-Hall Canada Inc., Toronto 
Prentice-Hall Hispanoamericana, S.A., Mexico 
Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, New Delhi 
Prentice-Hall of Japan, Inc., Tokyo 
Simon & Schuster Asia Pic. Ltd., Singapore 
Editora Prentice-Hall do Brasil, Ltda., Rio de Janeiro 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs. New Jersey 


To my wife, Mary 
who made it possible 


/ 




Contents 


PREFACE xv 

Part I What’s It All About?: A Qualitative Introduction 1 

1 INTRODUCTORY: WHY QUANTUM PHYSICS? 1 

1.1 The Classical Point of View 3 

1.2 Through the Looking Glass: The Quantum Point of View 6 

1.3 Final Thoughts: What’s It All About? 12 
Annotated Selected Readings 13 
Exercises and Problems 14 

2 INTO THE MICRO WORLD: DUALITY AND THE DOUBLE SLIT 18 

2.1 Waves versus Particles 20 
*2.2 On The Nature of Light 21 
*2.3 Understanding Diffraction the Classical Way 26 

*2.4 Understanding Interference 28 

2.5 Double Trouble 31 

2.6 It All Started with de Broglie 36 

2.7 The Controversial Concept of Complimentarity 40 


vii 


2.8 Final Thoughts: A Few Words About Words 42 
Annotated Selected Readings 42 
Exercises and Problems 44 

Part II Starting from Scratch 

3 FIRST POSTULATES: THE STATE FUNCTION AND ITS 
INTERPRETATION 

3.1 Patterns of Propagating Possibility: Probability Waves 52 

3.2 Systems and States Thereof 57 
*3.3 Probabilities: A Review 61 

3.4 The Gospel According to Born 68 

3.5 How to Normalize a State Function 73 

3.6 Great Expectations (and Uncertainties) 79 

3.7 Final Thoughts: What the State Function Isn’t 85 
Annotated Selected Readings 87 

Exercises and Problems 89 

4 AN ILLUSTRATIVE INTERLUDE: WAVE PACKETS IN ONE 
DIMENSION 

4.1 On the Nature of the Free-Particle State Function 99 

4.2 Wave Packet Construction for Fun and Profit 106 

4.3 The Amplitude Function 111 

*4.4 Fourier Analysis (A Mathematical Detour) 116 

4.5 An Extended Example: The Gaussian Wave Packet 
Unmasked 123 

4.6 Uncertainty Regained 128 

4.7 (Not Quite) All About Momentum 130 

4.8 Final Thoughts: A Wealth of Representations 135 

Annotated Selected Readings 137 

Exercises and Problems 138 

5 OBSERVABLES IN QUANTUM PHYSICS: A PRAGMATISTS 
APPROACH 

5.1 Observables for Macroscopic Systems 145 


viii 


Contents 



5.2 The Trouble with Momentum 147 


5.3 And Now For Something Completely Different: The Momentum 
Operator 150 

5.4 The Operator Postulate 156 

5.5 The Mathematics of Operators: An Introduction 159 

5.6 Generalizing Our Expectations (and Uncertainties) 166 

5.7 Operators and the Correspondence Principle 169 

5.8 Final Thoughts: Operators in Momentum Space 173 
Annotated Selected Readings 174 

Exercises and Problems 175 

6 A QUANTUM EQUATION OF MOTION: THE SCHRODINGER 

EQUATION AT LAST 180 

6.1 What We Talk About When We Talk About Motion 183 

6.2 Satisfying Examples 189 

6.3 A Personality Profile of the TDSE 193 

6.4 Superposition Derived 197 

6.5 Is Probability Conserved? 200 

*6.6 The Free-Particle Wave Packet Revisited 205 
*6.7 The Life and Times of a Gaussian Wave Packet 208 

6.8 Probability Fluid and Its Flow 214 

6.9 Probability Flow in the Laboratory 221 

6.10 Final Thoughts: Quantum Causality 226 
Annotated Selected Readings 228 
Exercises and Problems 229 

7 SIMPLIFYING MATTERS: THE TIME-INDEPENDENT 

SCHRODINGER EQUATION 236 


7.1 

In Search of Separable Wave Functions 

7.2 

Time and Energy 241 


7.3 

A Profile of the TISE 243 


7.4 

A Particle in an Escape-Proof Box 

249 

7.5 

A Closer Look at Stationarity 258 


*7.6 

Superpositions of Stationary States 

263 


/ 


Contents ix 



7.7 Final Thoughts: Do Stationary States Really Exist? 269 
Exercises and Problems 270 

Part III Examples, Examples, Examples 273 

8 STATES OF A PARTICLE IN ONE DIMENSION I: MAINLY 

PIECEWISE-CONSTANT POTENTIALS 273 

8.1 What Do One-Dimensional Piecewise-Constant Potentials Have 
to Do with the Real World? 275 

8.2 A Duplicity of States: Bound versus Unbound States 279 

*8.3 Particles in Collision: An Introduction to Quantum 
Scattering 284 

8.4 Solving the TISE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 291 

8.5 The Interpretation of Continuum-State Eigenfunctions 304 

8.6 Tunnelling for Fun and Profit 311 

8.7 Bound States of the Finite Square Well 319 

8.8 The Finite Square Well: The Answers 327 

8.9 Final Thoughts—and an Application 337 
Annotated Selected Readings 340 
Exercises and Problems 340 

9 STATES OF A PARTICLE IN ONE DIMENSION II: MAINLY 

CONTINUOUS POTENTIALS 353 

9.1 Regions, Regions Everywhere 355 

9.2 Curvature Is the Key 358 

9.3 The Stationary States of an Arbitrary Potential 364 

*9.4 Mathematical Properties of Bound-State Eigenfunctions 370 
9.5 The Harmonic Oscillator Made Simple 374 
*9.6 An Application: The Vibrations of a Diatomic Molecule 380 

9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 384 

9.8 The SHO—The Answers 396 

9.9 The SHO—The Physics 399 

*9.10 The Incredible Sloshing Oscillator 410 
*9.11 Final Thoughts—and an Application of the Linear Potential 413 

Exercises and Problems 420 


x 


Contents 



Part IV Tools of The Trade: More Formalism 

10 OPERATORS IN QUANTUM MECHANICS I: THE IMPORTANCE 
OF BEING HERMITIAN 

10.1 Operators in Review: A Capsule Summary of Chapter 5 437 

10.2 More Mathematics of Quantum-Mechanical Operators 440 

10.3 Operators with Freedom of Choice: Hermiticity 446 

10.4 Fun with Adjoints 455 

10.5 All About Eigenvalue Equations 458 

10.6 Consequences of Hermiticity I: Real Eigenvalues and Ortho¬ 
normal Eigenfunctions 464 

10.7 Consequences of Hermiticity II: Completeness and Closure 468 

10.8 Final Thoughts—and a Final Example: The Parity Operator 475 
Annotated Selected Readings 481 

Exercises and Problems 482 

11 OPERATORS IN QUANTUM MECHANICS II: TO COMMUTE 
OR NOT TO COMMUTE 

11.1 Simultaneous Eigenstates and the Commutator 488 

11.2 Evaluating Commutators: The Right Way, the Wrong Way, and 
the Easy Way 496 

11.3 Operator Manipulations and Matrix Representations 501 

11.4 Commutators and Uncertainty Principles 505 

11.5 Constants of the Motion in Classical and Quantum Physics 511 

11.6 Conservation Laws in Quantum Physics 514 

11.7 Physical Laws and the Correspondence Principle 519 

*11.8 The Strangest “Uncertainty Relation” of Them All 524 

*11.9 Final Thoughts: Conservation “Laws,” Dogma, and the Fall of 
Parity 530 

Exercises and Problems 532 

12 EIGENFUNCTION EXPANSIONS: HOW TO SOLVE ANY 
PROBLEM IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 

12.1 The Fundamental Problem of Quantum Physics 538 

12.2 The Generalized Born Interpretation 540 


Contents 



12.3 All That Heaven Allows: Possible Outcomes of 
Measurement 546 

*12.4 The Many Uses of Eigenfunction Expansions: Two 
Examples 550 

*12.5 Coping with the Continuum 555 

12.6 The Artful Dodge: Solving the TDSE the Easy Way 561 

*12.7 The Amazing Expanding Square Well (An Example) 567 

* 12.8 Momentum Redux: The Case of the Continuum Continued 576 
12.9 Final Thoughts: Constants of the Motion Reconsidered 580 
Exercises and Problems 583 

13 ALTERED STATES: THE GREAT MEASUREMENT MYSTERY 589 

13.1 The Role of Measurement in Quantum Physics 591 

13.2 The Effect of a Measurement on a State Function 593 

13.3 The Evolution of a State After Collapse 598 

*13.4 Multiple Measurements of Compatible Observables I 600 

*13.5 Multiple Measurements II: An Example 606 

*13.6 Dueling Observables: Multiple Measurements of Incompatible 
Observables 611 

13.7 Final Thoughts: Mysteries Abound 617 
Annotated Selected Readings 619 
Exercises and Problems 620 

APPENDIXES 622 

A SI Units (The International System of Units) 623 
B Fundamental Constants in SI (and CGS) Units 626 
C Order-of-Magnitude Estimates 628 

D Conversion Tables 629 

E Prefix Dictionary 632 

F A User’s Guide to Atomic Units 633 
G The Greek Alphabet 636 

H Handy Trigonometric Identities 637 

I Integrals You should Know 643 

J Integrals Involving the Gaussian Function 648 

xii Contents 

V 



K Review of Complex Numbers 650 
L The Dirac Delta Function 652 

Bibliography to the Appendixes 655 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

INDEX 


Contents 







Preface 


“I can’t stand it, you know,” he said, 
“your paradoxes are too monstrous...” 
“You are quite wrong,” said Ambrose. 

“I never make paradoxes; I wish I could.” 

—The White People 
Arthur Machen 


This is a book about physics, physics as natural philosophy. Its themes are embedded 
in the myriad beautiful connections among the physical concepts that govern the atomic 
and sub-atomic domain of matter. It is also a book about how these concepts manifest 
themselves in the mathematical machinery of quantum mechanics. In practice, these 
formulas are tools for solving problems involving microscopic systems; by applying 
them to a host of such problems you can begin to gain “quantum insight” into the nature 
of reality as understood in modern physics. Such understanding amounts to nothing less 
than a new way of thinking about the universe. My goal in this book is to provide an in- 
depth introduction to the concepts of quantum physics and their practical implementation. 

Although definitely a physics text, this book contains several dollops of history, 
biography, and philosophy. I want you to appreciate that quantum physics is more 
than a collection of abstract laws and equations; it is a paradigm of reality at its most 
fundamental level, a paradigm with profound, provocative implications. And I want 
you to meet a few of the men and women who, early in the 20th century, created this 
towering intellectual achievement. So in these pages you’ll have a chance to read some 
of their words. 

I have tried to write a “user-friendly” textbook and an honest one. I have not 
dodged or hidden the difficulties of quantum mechanics or its applications. This is not 
Quantum Physics Made Simple —I don’t believe quantum physics can be made simple. 
But I have tried to make it clear, sacrificing where necessary the elegance of brevity and 
rigor on the altar of clarity. 

Nor is this book Quantum Mechanics for Everybody. You’ll need a firm foundation 
in freshman and sophomore physics (mechanics, electricity and magnetism, and thermo¬ 
dynamics), a solid working knowledge of calculus and algebra, and at least a passing 
acquaintance with the physics of waves. 


xv 



This book contains more material than one can cover in a single semester, so be 
selective in what you study. I and others who have used the book have found that by 
omitting some of the optional (starred) sections, undergraduates (at the junior level) can 
cover Volume I in about 15 weeks. 

Since I began writing this book in 1981, many colleagues have asked, “Why write 
another quantum mechanics text?” A fair question. Neither the selection of topics nor 
their sequence in this book is particularly unconventional. But what I hope distinguishes 
it is its persistent emphasis on comprehension of the fundamentals of quantum physics 
and on how various aspects of this subject relate to one another, the sense in which 
quantum mechanics is a coherent intellectual structure. I care at least as much that you 
understand quantum mechanics as that you know how to use it to solve problems. 

Consequently Parts I and II focus on explaining and motivating the postulates 
that underlie the machinery of quantum mechanics. You can cover this material rather 
quickly, but do take time to think about it. The postulates are the heart and soul of 
quantum physics. Our first applications, in Part III, are simple single-particle systems in 
one dimension. Such problems highlight the essentials of quantum physics but avoid the 
mathematical clutter and complexity of three-dimensional systems. These are not mere 
pedantic exercises; research physicists often use one-dimensional models to approximate 
real-world systems that are too complicated to solve or understand. So at the end of 
most chapters in Part III we’ll take a look at such applications. 

In Volume II we’ll apply these fundamentals to the “real world” of three-dimensional, 
many-particle microscopic systems and will learn how to solve problems that are too dif¬ 
ficult to admit exact solution. There we’ll take up approximation methods such as per¬ 
turbation theory and the variational method, three-dimensional properties such as orbital 
angular momentum, a new kind of angular momentum called spin, and many-particle 
systems, including atoms and molecules. 

In both volumes I have provided considerable structure to help you organize your 
study. In addition to the customary chapters, sections, and subsections, they contain all 
sorts of asides, footnotes, boxed results, tables of formulae, etc. Think of this book as a 
layer cake with several levels of flavor. The most important material is in the top layer, 
the text. In the asides and footnotes you’ll find all sorts of tasty morsels: supplementary 
information, extensions of material, suggested readings and references—things that would 
interrupt your train of thought were they in the text proper. 

The best source of advice about how to study a book is not the author. Several 
students who used this manuscript in preliminary form, suggest the following: Plan to 
go through each chapter several times. On your first reading, skip sections or subsections 
that seem difficult, planning to return to them later. The first time through, don't even 
read the asides and footnotes; come back to them also on subsequent readings. Above 
all, work the Questions, Exercises and Problems. 

The best advice I have ever read about how to study was written by the mathe¬ 
matician Paul R. Halmos in his “automathography” / Want to Be A Mathematician (New 
York: Springer-Verlag, 1985), “[S]tudy actively. Don’t just read [the text]; fight it! Ask 
your own questions, look for your own examples, discover your own proofs.” Halmos 
was writing about math, but his advice pertains as well to physics. If you follow it, you 
will come away from this book with a solid, working knowledge of quantum physics; if 
you ignore it, the prospects are grim. You can no more learn quantum mechanics without 
practice than you could learn how to ride a bike, play a piano, or swim without riding, 
playing, or swimming. 


xvi 


Preface 



That’s why you’ll find in each chapter a host of Questions that will provoke you to 
think about the material and, at the end of each chapter, a wide selection of Exercises and 
Problems. Some of these anticipate material in subsequent chapters; others extend the 
content of the chapter you just read; still others provide opportunities to become familiar 
with new ideas through simple practice. I hope you will at least think through all the 
Questions and work all the Exercises. The Problems are a bit more challenging, but I’ve 
provided lots of help: most contain detailed directions, suggestions, helpful hints, etc. I 
cannot overemphasize the importance of your working as many of these as possible. 

You’ll also find throughout the book a host of very detailed examples. Rather than 
simply work these examples, I’ve tried to show you how to approach them, how to figure 
out how to work them. Please don’t treat these as recipes in a cookbook. Rather, consider 
them as paradigms; each illustrates one of many possible ways to apply the principles 
you have studied. You will learn more and have more fun if instead of parroting what I 
do, you discover your own approaches to problem solving 

Of course, presenting examples in great detail takes a lot of space, and I’ve been 
able to include only a handful of the many useful illustrations of introductory quantum 
mechanics. So seek out others. Dig around in the many fine quantum books you’ll find 
in your library (see the Bibliography at the end of this book). Better yet, make up your 
own examples. Again, Halmos’s advice is invaluable: “A good stock of examples, as 
large as possible, is indispensable for a thorough understanding of any concept, and when 
I want to learn something new, I make it my first job to build one.” 

Each chapter also contains recommended readings, annotated lists of additional 
sources that will enhance your understanding and enjoyment of quantum physics. Please 
don’t ignore these recommendations. Reading several explanations of important topics 
is good strategy for the study of any subject, but it’s particularly important for quantum 
mechanics, which is so counter-intuitive that you need to see it from several vantage 
points. 

This book grew out of my desire to convey a sense of the fascination and beauty 
of quantum physics. This won’t be the only time you study this subject, nor should it 
be. Quantum mechanics is like a many-faceted jewel: every time you look at it you 
discover amazing new things. But I have the privilege of introducing the subject to 
you, so I particularly hope that this book communicates some of my enthusiasm for it. 
I believe that learning quantum physics can and should be a joyous activity. Although 
undeniably hard work, the study of quantum mechanics and its applications to atoms, 
molecules, solids, nuclei, and the whole rest of the microcosm can be a tremendously 
exciting intellectual adventure. 

Finally, I want to know what you think. I hope that, if you feel so inclined, you’ll 
write to me at the Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Oklahoma, 
Norman, Oklahoma 73019 with your opinions of this book, your reaction to quantum 
physics, any errors you find in the text, or any suggestions you have for improvement 
should there be a second edition. But for now, settle down in a comfortable chair, get 
out some scratch paper, and dig in. You are about to be plunged into the Marvelous. 

Michael A. Morrison 
Norman, Oklahoma 


Preface xvii 


y 



Acknowledgments 


One of the great pleasures of finishing a book is thanking those who helped in its creation. 
First and foremost I owe a great intellectual debt to the mentors who have helped me 
learn how to think about quantum physics: my professors at Rice University, G. King 
Walters, Neal F. Lane, and Thomas L. Estle, and my long-time friend and colleague Dr. 
Lee A. Collins. My other mentors I know only through their works. Like most later- 
generation textbooks, mine is in part a mosaic of variations on the best of what I have 
found in many sources, primarily in the vast library of quantum mechanics texts that 
preceded this one. I have acknowledged these sources collectively in the Bibliography 
at the end of this book and, where memory served, in footnotes to the text. 

Closer to home, I am grateful to my fellow faculty members in the Department of 
Physics and Astronomy at the University of Oklahoma. During the many years since I 
began work on this book, they have consistently tolerated, encouraged, and supported me. 
In particular, Drs. Robert Petry, Thomas Miller, Deborah Watson, and Gregory Parker 
used various incarnations of this manuscript in classes and provided valuable feedback 
and brickbats. And Drs. Miller, Parker, Jack Cohn, Ryan Doezema, and Suzanne Willis 
read portions of the manuscript for technical accuracy. 

Students played a crucial role in the latter stages of work on this book. I have 
tested all or part of the manuscript in five courses. Although space precludes my thanking 
all of the long-suffering students in those classes, I must single out a few—Thomas 
Haynes, Brian Argrow, Jose Rodriguez, Bok-hyun Yoon, and Bryan Biegel—for their 
extraordinary efforts on behalf of this project. Three graduate students, Wayne Trail, Bill 
Isaacs, and Brian Elza, carefully read the manuscript in proof and found errors I would not 
have believed were still in it. Finally, I’m indebted to three colleagues, Drs. Ron Olowin, 
Richard Henry, and Sheridan Simon, who provided solace and suggestions during our 
eleventh-hour search for a new title. 


xviii 



I and this book also benefited from the advice of a number of outside reviewers, 
including Drs. Robert Hallock, Sheridan Simon, John L. Stevens, Sanford Kern, H. A. 
Gersh, Stephan Estreicher, and Robert Silbey. Thanks folks: I didn’t adopt all your 
suggestions, but I considered each one carefully. 

Preparing this manuscript for production would have been impossible had it not 
been for superb technical help from two sources. Ms. Johnette Ellis provided assistance 
beyond the call of duty during the trying end-game months of the summer of 1987. And 
my wife Mary, who does not share my fondness for physics, nevertheless proofread this 
entire, vast manuscript. 

Finally, I must acknowledge the staff at Prentice Hall and the physics editors with 
whom I worked on this project: Logan Campbell, who initiated it; Doug Humphrey, 
who served as midwife and father confessor through the long years of its evolution; and 
Holly Hodder, who saw the final manuscript into production. Most of all, I’m grateful 
to my production editor, Debra Wechsler, whose care, concern, and oversight has helped 
immeasurably to make this the book I envisioned when I started. 


Acknowledgments 


xix 



It is characteristic of all deep human problems 
that they are not to be approached without 
some humor and some bewildennent— 
science is no exception. 

—Freeman Dyson 

Disturbing the Universe 


In trying to achieve success 
No envy racks our hearts, 

For all we know and all we guess. 
We mutually impart. 

—Gilbert and Sullivan 
Princess Ida 


We shall go on seeking [truth] to the end, 
so long as there are men on the earth. 

We shall seek it in all manner of strange ways; 

some of them wise, 

and some of them utterly foolish. 

But the search will never end. 

—Arthur Machen 

“With the Gods in Spring” 



CHAPTER 1 

Introductory 

Why Quantum Physics? 


1.1 The Classical Point of View 

1.2 Through the Looking Glass: The Quantum Point of View 

1.3 Final Thoughts: What's It All About? 


y 



I wish to guide you on an excursion 
which is long and rather difficult 
but worth the trouble, 
so I am going to climb ahead of you, 
slowly. 

—Golem’s Inaugural Lecture 
in Imaginary Magnitude 
by Stanislaw Lem 


How does the universe work? What are the principles that underlie natural phenomena? 
Philosophers have pondered such questions for millennia; their answers reflect the world 
view of Western civilization—how we perceive ourselves in relation to the universe. 

In the early years of this century the dominant world view was determinism , a 
tenet that had its origins in the philosophical musings of Descartes. Descartes’ metaphor 
for the universe was a gigantic clockwork machine, a Rube Goldberg device that grinds 
relentlessly onward, towards eternity. According to this interpretation, the future is 
preordained and fully predictable. All of existence is described precisely by physical 
laws, and, in principle, can be known by man. 

Nature, however, had a surprise in store for philosophers. In the first decades of 
the twentieth century, they were to see this world view subverted, uprooted, and toppled 
by a young upstart physical theory called quantum mechanics. 

Theoretical physics has come a long way since those fateful days in the 1920’s 
and 30’s when physicists were taking the first tentative steps towards a radical new 
definition of reality. So far have we come that in 1981 the physicist Steven Hawking 
could reasonably predict that 1 

... by the end of the century ... we might have a complete, consistent, and unified 

theory of the physical interactions which would describe all possible observations. 

The foundation of that unified theory is quantum mechanics, the subject matter of this 
book. 

What is quantum mechanics? You probably know that if you want to understand 
how a transistor works or the principles behind the laser in your compact disc player you’d 
better not use classical physics. Newton’s mechanics and Maxwell’s electromagnetic 
theory can explain macroscopic phenomena, such as the motion of billiard balls or 
rockets, but fail spectacularly when applied to microscopic phenomena, such as proton- 
atom scattering or the flow of electrons in a semiconductor. An understanding of such 
processes requires a better mousetrap: quantum mechanics. 

More precisely, quantum mechanics is a collection of postulates based on a huge 
number of experimental observations, and the tools derived from those postulates. We 
use these tools to analyze, predict, and understand microscopic phenomena. Hence 
quantum theory forms the bedrock of the modem physics of matter—atoms, molecules, 
and solids—and is at the core of such diverse sciences as astrophysics and biochemistry. 
In its more pragmatic guises, quantum mechanics plays a vital role in a vast array of 
technological applications, some of which we use every day— e.g., the microchips in the 
computer on which I am writing this chapter. 

an article optimistically entitled “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?” [Phys. Bull. 32, 15 

(1981)]. 


2 Chap. 1 Introductory 



Thus, in one form or another, quantum physics pervades the life of everyone in 
our high-tech world. Discussing the importance of quantum mechanics to non-physicists, 
Heinz R. Pagels has written 2 

When the history of this century is written, we shall see that political events—in spite 
of their immense cost in human lives and money—will not be the most influential 
events. Instead the main event will be the first human contact with the invisible 
quantum world and the subsequent biological and computer revolutions. 

You are about to make contact with the quantum world. 

In this chapter, we’ll ease into this bizarre world, beginning in § 1.1 with a short 
review of the structure of classical mechanics. We’ll also see the way in which that 
structure supported the deterministic ideas of philosophers of the early 1900’s. Then in 
§1.2 we’ll take a whirlwind tour of the world according to quantum physics, focusing 
on some of the new ideas that so devastated the Newtonian view. 

This chapter and the next provide a bird’s eye view of quantum theory; in them, 
we’ll examine qualitatively the central ideas of this theory. Then, beginning in Chap. 3, 
we’ll set off on our voyage of discovery, formulating these notions mathematically and 
applying them to the denizens of the microscopic universe. 


1.1 THE CLASSICAL POINT OF VIEW 

Consider Newtonian mechanics. In their simplest form, the laws of classical mechanics 
are written in terms of particle trajectories. So the trajectory underlies the structure of 
classical physics, and the particle underlies its model of physical reality. We start with 
these basic elements. 

Particles and Their Trajectories 

Physicists, classical or otherwise, study the universe by studying isolated fragments of 
it. These little chunks of existence are called systems: classical physics pertains to 
macroscopic systems, quantum physics to microscopic systems. 3 A system, then, is just 
a collection of particles that interact among themselves via internal forces and that may 
interact with the world outside via external fields. 

To a classical physicist, a particle is an indivisible mass point possessing a variety 
of physical properties that can be measured. In physical theory, measurable quantities are 
called observables. By listing the values at any time of the observables of a particle, we 
can specify its state. (The trajectory is an equivalent, more convenient way to specify a 
particle’s state.) The state of the system is just the collection of the states of the particles 
comprising it. 

Aside: Extrinsic versus Intrinsic Properties. Classical physicists often characterize 
properties of a particle as intrinsic or extrinsic. Intrinsic properties don’t depend on 

2 The Cosmic Code: Quantum Physics as the Language of Nature (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1982), page 98. 

3 The validity of partitioning the universe into systems for the convenience of scientists is discussed 
in Chap. 4 of The Origin of Knowledge and the Imagination by J. Bronowski (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1978). 


Sec. 1.1 The Classical Point of View 3 



the particle’s location, don’t evolve with time, and aren’t influenced by its physical 
environment; rest mass and charge are intrinsic properties. Extrinsic properties, on 
the other hand, evolve with time in response to the forces on the particle; position 
and momentum are extrinsic properties. 

According to classical physics, all properties, intrinsic and extrinsic, of a particle 
could be known to infinite precision. For example, we could measure the precise val¬ 
ues of the position and momentum of a particle at the same time. Of course, precise 
knowledge of everything is a chimera—in the real world, neither measuring apparatus 
nor experimental technique is perfect, and experimental errors bedevil physicists as they 
do all scientists. But in principle both are perfectible: that is, our knowledge of the 
physical universe is limited only by ourselves, not by nature. 

How does a classical theorist predict the outcome of a measurement? He uses 
trajectories. 4 The trajectory of a single particle consists of the values of its position and 
momentum at all times after some (arbitrary) initial time t 0 : 5 

{r(£),p(£) ; t > t 0 }, trajectory (1.1) 

where the (linear) momentum is, by definition, 

p(t) = m^r(t) = mv(t), (1.2) 

with m the mass of the particle. 

Trajectories are the “state descriptors” of Newtonian physics. To study the evolu¬ 
tion of the state represented by the trajectory (1.1), we use Newton’s Second Law, 

m^r(4) = -VV(r.t), (1-3) 

where V(r ,t) is the potential energy of the particle. 6 To obtain the trajectory for t > t 0 , 
we need only know V^r,*) and the initial conditions, the values of r and p at the initial 
time t 0 . With the trajectory in hand, we can study various properties of the particle in 
the state that the trajectory describes, e.g., its energy or orbital angular momentum. 

Notice that classical physics tacitly assumes that we can measure the initial condi¬ 
tions without altering the motion of the particle— e.g., that in measuring the momentum of 
the particle, we transfer to it only a negligible amount of momentum. 7 Thus the scheme 
of classical physics— which is illustrated in Fig. 1.1— is based on precise specification of 
the position and momentum of a particle. 

I do not mean to imply by this cursory description that classical physics is easy. 
Solving the equations of motion for a system with lots of particles interacting among 

4 This is, of course, a gross oversimplification. For a closer look at Newtonian physics, see Herbert 
Goldstein’s classic text Classical Mechanics , now in its second edition (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 
1983). 

Conventionally, we think of a trajectory as a path in geometrical space. In classical physics, however, 
a trajectory is usually taken to mean a path in "phase space” defined by the position and momentum at all 
times t>to. 

6 As written, Eq. (1.3) is valid for conservative forces, i.e., ones that do not depend on the velocity v. 
Recall that the force is related to the potential energy by F = -W(r,t). 

7 To determine p (t 0 ) we must measure v(< 0 )- This quantity is the rate of change of position, so 
to measure it we must observe r(f) at two nearby times—say, to and fo + A t, making the (known) time 
increment A t as small as our apparatus will allow. Such position measurements necessarily entail a change in 
the particle’s momentum, but this effect is insignificant for a macroscopic particle. 


4 Chap. 1 Introductory 



Particle 

masses 


Forces on 
and between 
particles 


Initial 
conditions 
at t 0 



Trajectories {r,(t), p,(f); t >t 0 \ 
for ail particles 


Figure 1.1 The Newtonian Universe 
Grinder. Fed the proper information, the 
great machine of classical mechanics can 
predict the future of the universe. This 
machine is now obsolete. 


themselves or exposed to complicated external fields is a formidable task. Contemporary 
applications of Newtonian mechanics to problems like celestial mechanics (the motion 
of the planets in our solar system) require massive computers and budgets to match. 
At worst, one may be unable, using present technology, to solve these equations. The 
important point is that in principle , given sufficient time and scratch paper, we could 
predict from the initial positions and momenta of all particles the precise future behavior 
of any system—indeed, of the entire universe. That’s the classical view. 


The Determinate Universe 


The underlying assumptions and philosophical implications of classical physics are so 
familiar that you may have never given them a second thought. For example, classical 
physics ascribes to the universe an objective reality, an existence external to and inde¬ 
pendent of human observers. This assumption reassures us that when we do research 
in physics we are studying what is actually “out there,” beyond and distinct from our 
consciousness, and that we can design experiments that do not affect in any significant 
way the systems they measure. That is, in an objective universe we can control the 
interaction between the observer and the observed and, if clever enough, can make this 
interaction negligibly weak. 

Our other central assumption about the nature of the classical universe is that it’s 
predictable: knowing the initial conditions of the constituents of any system, however 
complicated, we can use Newton’s Laws to predict its future. Precisely, without am¬ 
biguity or uncertainty. This notion is the essence of determinism, which, supported 
by Newtonian mechanics, dominated philosophical thinking until the advent of quantum 
theory. 


Sec. 1.1 The Classical Point of View 5 






If the universe is determinate, then for every effect there must be a cause. After 
all, if all events, all phenomena can be predicted and explained precisely by physics, 
then it must be possible to backtrack from any event to find, somewhere in the dim 
recesses of history, its cause. We may have to look long and hard—the bird that just 
fell off a tree limb outside my window may have been influenced by an event during 
the Peloponnesian wars—but somewhere there is a cause. Or so says the principle of 
causality. 

Causality was an important element of nineteenth century philosophy. It had im¬ 
portant implications for physicists of that era, for it guaranteed the reproducibility of 
experiments— i.e., that two identical systems with the same initial conditions (i.e., in the 
same state) subject to the same measurement will yield identical results. Same causes: 
same effects. Very neat and tidy. 

I suppose the deterministic world view implied by Newtonian mechanics could, 
even today, seem comforting, for it implies that the universe can be understood fully 
and dealt with rationally. But it has a dark side. For example, if the universe is ruled 
by causality, then free will is a meaningless concept, for the universe is a vast, mindless 
machine that controls our every action, our every decision. Everything that happens 
happens because of something that happened in the past, not because we chose to make 
it happen. According to this view, if you “decide” to get married or to take a job or 
to collect water buffalo, you do so not by choice but because of past events. In such a 
universe, our loves, hopes, and dreams are but delusions, hiding the grim reality that we 
are but cogs in Descartes’ clockwork machine. Goals are irrelevant; human aspirations 
pointless. 

Thus determinism is a dehumanizing philosophy. It describes a universe that is 
infinitely predictable, holding few surprises. All can be known; nothing is unexpected. 
Determinism is boring. It is also wrong. 


1.2 THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS: THE QUANTUM POINT 
OF VIEW 


We shall be plunged normally 
into the marvelous. 

—Noel Amaud 


We have seen that Newtonian mechanics is constructed from particle trajectories. One 
reason classical physics fails when applied to microscopic systems is that the constituents 
of such systems are not particles in the classical sense of the word. Moreover, they do 
not have trajectories. Thus to understand the physics of the microworld—that is, to 
understand the results of experiments on microscopic particles—we must radically revise 
our conceptual description of a particle. 

When Is a Particle Not a Particle? 

In describing the quantum world, we must abandon the classical notion of a particle as 
an indivisible mass point with an independent existence and well-defined, measurable 
extrinsic properties. Whatever microscopic entities are, they are certainly not indivisible 


6 Chap. 1 Introductory 



mass points. We can verify this assertion in the laboratory. In suitably designed experi¬ 
ments quantum “particles” act like classical particles—appearing, for example, as spots 
on a screen. But in other experiments their transit through space is like that of a wave, 
manifesting behavior such as diffraction and interference, as though they were diffuse 
wave fronts (see §2.5). This apparently contradictory behavior is a manifestation of the 
wave-particle duality that characterizes the domain where quanta dwell. 

In our study of duality in Chap. 2, we’ll see why it poses such a challenge to 
the student of quantum physics: it renders useless the conventional mental images with 
which we visualize physical phenomena. Thus, an atomic electron is not a tiny “planet” 
orbiting a “nuclear sun,” as in the Rutherford and Bohr models of the atom. But neither 
is it a “fuzzy” thing, smeared out over a region of space, as it is portrayed in many 
introductory physics texts. The electron is something else , neither particle nor wave but 
eerily reminiscent of both. 8 

The dual nature of subatomic particles subverts the classical concept of a particle. 
But the true nature of microscopic entities is even more nebulous than is implied by 
wave-particle duality, for the properties of quantum particles are not, in general, well- 
defined until they are measured. In a sense, the physical properties of electrons, protons, 
and the like are “potential” or “latent” properties until an experimenter—a macroscopic 
being—performs a measurement (see Chap. 5). 

You will encounter this disquieting aspect of quantum mechanics if you ask a 
quantum physicist to predict the value you would obtain were you to measure, say, the 
position of an electron in a metal. He cannot give you a definite answer, even if he knows 
fully the state of the electron just prior to the proposed measurement. The inability of 
quantum theory to provide precise answers to such simple questions is not a deficiency 
of the theory; rather it is a reflection of its essential nature. We can see this if we look 
at how quantum mechanics specifies the state of a particle. 

Unlike a classical state, a quantum state is a conglomeration of several possible 
outcomes of measurement of physical properties. At most, quantum physicists can tell 
you only the possible outcomes and the probability that you will obtain one or another of 

them. Quantum mechanics is expressed in the language of probabilities , not certainties. 
(A grammar of this new language appears in Chap. 3.) It is inherently statistical in 
nature, describing not definite results of a measurement on an individual system, but 
rather possible results of measurements on a large number of identical systems. What, 

then, controls what actually happens in a particular measurement— e.g ., which of the 
possible values of position a particle exhibits when we measure this quantity? Random 
chance. 

Of course, were we to carry out a position measurement on a single particle, we 
would get a single value. So immediately after the measurement, we can meaningfully 
talk about the position of the particle—its position is the number we got in the mea¬ 
surement. But what about immediately before the measurement? According to quantum 
mechanics, the particle does not then have a position. Rather, its position prior to mea¬ 
surement is latent—a mere possibility, waiting to be made actual. 

Thus by the act of measurement, we change the state of the particle from one 
in which it is characterized by a plethora of possible positions to one in which it has a 
single, well-defined position. Clearly, measurement will play a more vital role in quantum 

Nonetheless, we persist in referring to subatomic whatevers as “particles.” (To avoid an excrescence of 
punctuation, we leave off the quote marks.) The distinguished physicist Sir Arthur Eddington once suggested 
the term wavicles for quantum particles. Perhaps fortunately, the word never caught on. 


Sec. 1.2 The Quantum Point of View 7 



physics than in classical physics. When we study the microworld, experimentation is not 
just a way of discovering the nature of external reality, but rather is a way of creating 
certain aspects of reality! In contrast to the assumptions of classical physics, an observer 
cannot observe a microscopic system without altering some of its properties. 

Intrinsically indeterminate interactions between the observer and the observed are 
an inevitable feature of the quantum universe, one that applies not just to position, but 
to all properties of microscopic particles. Some physicists believe that we macroscopic 
observers “create” the microscopic building blocks of the universe by actualizing via 
measurement their various physical properties. 

This interaction is unavoidable: the effect of the observer on the observed cannot 
be reduced to zero , in principle or in practice. This fact, which is reflected in the 
mathematical structure of quantum theory and has been verified by.countless experiments, 
demolishes the philosophical notion of an objective universe, the idea that what we study 
in physics is necessarily a “real world” external to and independent of our perceptions. 9 

The observer-observed interaction is also uncontrollable. Although we can be sure 
that when we measure the properties of a microscopic particle we will change its state, 
we can neither predict nor influence precisely how the state will be changed. Random 
chance determines that. 

In fact, randomness governs microscopic phenomena even when man is not study¬ 
ing them. A famous example of this seeming perversity of nature is radioactive decay of 
an atom. Quantum mechanics prohibits us from predicting precisely when a particular 
atom will decay, emitting radiation. At most, we can determine the probability that it 
will decay in a given time interval. The role of randomness in microscopic physical 
processes shatters the illusion that the universe is deterministic. 

The Decline and Fall of the Trajectory 

So much for the idea of using the classical model of a particle to describe a microscopic 
entity. But can we salvage the basic state descriptor of classical physics, the trajectory? 

The first step in determining the trajectory of a particle is measuring its initial 
conditions, x(t 0 ) and p x (to)- 10 To determine the accuracy of our results, we would 
perform such a measurement not on just one particle, but on a large number of identical 
particles, all in the same state. 11 

Each individual measurement yields a value for x and a value for p x (subject to 
experimental uncertainties). But the results of different measurements are not the same, 
even though the systems are identical. If graphed, these results are seen to fluctuate 
about a central peak, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2. (A similar spread of results characterizes 
measurement of the y- or 2 - components of position and momentum.) 

At first, the fact that the results of many identical experiments are not the same 
doesn’t worry us; we think it’s just a manifestation of the experimental error that bedevils 

9 It also gives rise to a host of fascinating metaphysical questions: Do particles exist if their properties 
are not being measured? Is what we study in physics reality or merely our perceptions of reality? What are the 
implications of quantum theory for the existence of God? With some regret, I’ll not discuss these questions in 
this text. 

“’Actually, we have to measure all three Cartesian components of position and momentum: ®(to), 
y(t 0 ), z{to), and p x {t 0 ), p y (t 0 ), Pz(t 0 ). But I can make my point by considering only the x components. 

11 Such an aggregate of identical systems in the same state is called an ensemble , a concept you’ll meet 
formally in Chap. 3. 


8 Chap. 1 Introductory 



<x> 

X 

<p) 

P 

(a) 


(b) 



Figure 1.2 The results of measurement of the x components of the position and mo¬ 
mentum of a large number of identical quantum particles. Each plot shows the number 
of experiments that yield the values on the abscissa. Results for each component are 
seen to fluctuate about a central peak, the mean value. 


all measurements. According to classical physics, we can reduce the errors in x and p x 
to zero and thereby determine precisely the initial conditions. 

But we cannot unambiguously specify the values of these observables for a micro¬ 
scopic particle. This peculiarity of nature in the microscopic realm is mirrored in the 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle (HUP). In its simplest form, the HUP shows that any 
attempt to simultaneously measure rc(i 0 ) and p x (t 0 ) necessarily introduces an impreci¬ 
sion in each observable. 12 No matter how the experiment is designed, the results are 
inevitably uncertain, and the uncertainties A x(t 0 ) and Ap x (t 0 ), which are measures of 
fluctuations like those in Fig. 1.2, cannot be reduced to zero. Instead, their product must 
satisfy the condition (see Chap. 4) 


Ax{t 0 ) Ap x {t 0 ) > “, (1.4) 

2 27T 

where h is Planck’s Constant (See Chap. 2) 

h = 6.626 x 10 -34 J-sec. (1.5) 

Not a very big number, but not zero either. [Similar constraints apply to the pairs 
of uncertainties Ay(tu), Ap„(tu) and Az(to). Ap 2 (£ () ).] Position and momentum are 
fundamentally incompatible observables , in the sense that knowing the precise value of 
one precludes knowing anything about the other. 

But there is a deeper dimension to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. Quantum 
theory reveals that the limitation reflected by Eq. (1.4) on our ability to simultaneously 

12 You are probably familiar with one illustration of this principle: the gamma-ray microscope. This 
experiment is discussed in almost all lower-level modem physics texts as a gedanken (thought) experiment. 
But today, with the advent of electron microscopes, it is a reality. See B. G. William, Amer. Jour. Phys., 52, 
435 (1984). 


Sec. 1.2 The Quantum Point of View 9 


measure x and p x is implicit in nature. It has nothing to do with a particular apparatus 
or with experimental technique. Quantum mechanics proves that a particle cannot si¬ 
multaneously have a precise value of x and a precise value of p x . Indeed, in Chap. 4 
we’ll derive the HUP from first principles. 

Similar uncertainty principles constrain our ability to measure other pairs of incom¬ 
patible observables. But uncertainty relations such as (1.4) are not veiled criticisms of 
experimental physicists. They are fundamental limitations on knowledge: the universe is 
inherently uncertain. Man cannot know all of existence. We might think of uncertainty 
relations as nature’s way of restraining our ambitions. 

The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle strikes at the very heart of classical physics: 
the trajectory. Obviously, if we cannot know the position and momentum of a particle 
at t 0 we cannot specify the initial conditions of the particle and hence cannot calculate 
its trajectory. Indeed, since the HUP applies at any time, it makes no sense to ascribe a 
trajectory to a microscopic particle. We are forced, however reluctantly, to conclude that 
microscopic particles do not have trajectories. But once we throw out trajectories, we 
must also jettison Newton’s Laws. And there goes the ball game: stripped of its basic 
elements and fundamental laws, the whole structure of classical physics collapses. 

The demise of classical physics occurred around 1930. Sitting amidst the rubble, 
physicists of that era realized that their only alternative (other than to change careers) 
was to rebuild—to construct from scratch a new physical theory, one based on elements 
other than trajectories and on laws other than those of Newton and Maxwell. Thus began 
the quantum revolution, whose reverberations are still being felt. 

Classical and Quantum Physics Get Together 

To say that classical physics died around 1930 is a bit too dramatic. The physics of 
Newton and Maxwell still accurately and beautifully describes the macroscopic world. 
Knowing this, physicists developing quantum mechanics demanded that when applied 
to macroscopic systems, the new physics must reduce to the old physics. Thus, as the 
size of the system being studied increases, the quantum laws of motion (which we’ll 
discover in Chap. 6) must go over smoothly into those of Newtonian mechanics, and 
non-classical phenomena such as uncertainty and duality must become undetectable. 
Neils Bohr codified this requirement into his Correspondence Principle, the essential 
elements of which are sketched in Fig. 1.3. We shall return to this principle repeatedly, 
since the ability of quantum mechanics to satisfy it is an important theoretical justification 
of the new physics. 


~10’°/7? >0.01 m 

(atoms, molecules) (us, etc.) 


Quantum 

physics 


Figure 1.3 The rudiments of the 
Correspondence Principle, the theoretical 
link between the microworld and the 
macroworld. 


Laws 

Physical models 
Predictions 


Classical 
* physics 


10 


Chap. 1 


Introductory 





The experimental justification of quantum theory is that it works. The predictions, 
qualitative and quantitative, of quantum mechanics have been verified by a host of 
experiments on a diverse collection of systems. These verifications are of paramount 
importance to physics, for in some ways quantum theory is a fragile creation. It is an 
inferential theory, in which we devise a handful of postulates (see Part II) and from 
them derive equations, which can then be put to the test of experimental justification. If 
the equations pass this test, then we have confidence that the postulates, which cannot 
be directly tested, are correct. But it would take only one repeatable experiment whose 
results confounded the equations of quantum mechanics to bring the whole structure 
tumbling down. To date, the edifice stands. Quantum mechanics remains the only theory 
we have to explain how matter is constructed and how physical processes at the atomic 
level work. 

The Indeterminate Universe 


As this whirlwind overview may suggest, the new physics, quantum physics, differs from 
classical physics in nearly every way imaginable—from its elements and laws to the kind 
of knowledge it provides. It is in this last respect that the implications of the quantum 
revolution are most profound. 

Classical physics yields precise information about the properties and behavior of 
individual, independent systems. It holds out to the scientist the promise that, in principle 
at least, he can know everything. Quantum physics says that this is just not so, that 
nature imposes fundamental limitations on knowledge, constraints such as the Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle. 

These limitations derive from the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics. The 
new physics yields only statistical information about aggregates of identical systems. It 
is mute about the behavior of individual systems. Moreover, the statistical information 
provided by quantum theory is limited to the results of measurements. 13 That is, quantum 
physicists are not allowed to infer facts about a system unless these facts could be verified 
by experiment. This is a severe limitation—for example, it prohibits us from ascribing an 
orbit (a path) to a particle, because measurements of position are necessarily performed 
at discrete times (see § 2.5). Even if we measure the position of a particle at two very 
nearby times, t x and t 2 , we cannot even make the simple inference that it traveled from 
r(*i) to r (t 2 ) via a path in geometric space; we can only say that we found it at r(^) 
at t\ and then at r(£ 2 ) at t 2 . 

This limitation, that physics describes only observed phenomena, forces us to think 
about reality in a strange, new way. At its most fundamental level, reality seems to be 
discontinuous. Here is Erwin Schrodinger, the father of quantum mechanics, on this 
most non-classical feature of his theory: 


... it is better to regard a particle not as a permanent entity but as an instanta¬ 
neous event. Sometimes these events form chains that give the illusion of permanent 
beings—but only in particular circumstance and only for an extremely short period 
of time in every single case. 

Quantum physics is a harsh taskmaster. 


13 In the words of one textbook author: Thou shall not make any statement that can never he verified. 
[R. G. Winter, Quantum Physics (Belmont, Ca.: Wadsworth, 1979)]. 


Sec. 1.2 The Quantum Point of View 11 



In closing, I should note that all this has not set well with many physicists. Even 
today, some find the world view implied by quantum mechanics—a subjective universe, 
acausal and indeterminate, where the knowledge accessible to man is limited—to be 
intolerably offensive. And the battle over the interpretation of quantum mechanics goes 
on. (You’ll find accounts of minor skirmishes in Parts II and IV of this book.) But all 
agree on the usefulness of the theory for predicting and understanding the physics of 
matter. It is, after all, the only game in town. 


1.3 FINAL THOUGHTS: WHAT’S IT ALL ABOUT? 

From the overview in § 1.2, you may have concluded that quantum mechanics is not a 
particularly easy subject. ’Tis true; to pretend otherwise would be deceitful. But why is 
learning quantum mechanics hard? 

There are, I think, three reasons. First, we grew up in and now inhabit a macro¬ 
scopic world. Our intuition—our sense of how things ought to behave —has been rein¬ 
forced every waking minute by experiences in a world that abides by classical physics. 
Moreover, as students of physics, our intuition has been deepened and further reinforced 
by our study of classical physics. Quantum physics is an affront to that intuition. To 
understand it, to use it effectively, we must develop a new way of thinking about the 
way things work, because, as Richard P. Feynman has written, 14 

Things on a very small scale behave like nothing you have any direct experience 
about. They do not behave like waves, they do not behave like particles, they do not 
behave like clouds, or billiard balls, or weights on springs, or like anything that you 
have ever seen. 

Second, quantum physics operates at a level that is one step removed from reality. It 
is more abstract than classical physics. While classical physicists can deal with well- 
defined trajectories that describe particles they can visualize, quantum physicists must 
forever wander through a haze of uncertainty, probabilities, and indeterminacy, trying to 
understand a universe they cannot directly observe. The microcosm can be understood, 
but it cannot be seen. 

Third, quantum mechanics is inherently mathematical. There is an important dis¬ 
tinction here between classical and quantum physics. In classical physics we use math¬ 
ematical methods to implement the ideas of the theory, but we can discuss those ideas 
without recourse to mathematics. This is not possible with quantum mechanics. Notwith¬ 
standing the achievements of writers who have recently tried to popularize quantum 
theory—several of whose books I have included in this chapter’s Selected Reading list— 
I believe it is impossible to fully grasp the principles of quantum theory without seeing 
them expressed mathematically. Math is more than a tool for solving quantum mechanics 
problems: mathematics is the language of quantum physics. As we move deeper into 
quantum theory, we’ll see physics and math become inextricably intertwined. Thus quan¬ 
tum physics demands that we think in a new, abstract, inherently mathematical way—no 
easy task. 

14 In Volume III of The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1965). Only 
the third volume of Feynman’s lecture series is devoted to quantum mechanics, but I strongly recommend the 
whole scries to every serious student of physics. 


12 Chap. 1 Introductory 



Finally, we must re-think and redefine many familiar words and concepts, and when 
we use these words to discuss quantum concepts, we must do so with great care and 
precision. Familiar terms such as “particle” and “motion” assume in the quantum domain 
subtle overtones and shades of meaning that we ignore at our peril. We have already seen 
an example of this in our discussion in § 1.2 of the “position” of a microscopic particle. 
The “position” of a quantum particle prior to its measurement is not a single, well-defined 
number, such as 10.7 m. Rather it must be specified as a collection of several—maybe 
an infinity of—values, none of which represent the position of the particle. Instead, each 
value represents a possibility, a location at which the particle might be found. 

In spite of these roadblocks—our classical intuition, the inherently abstract, math¬ 
ematical nature of quantum mechanics, and the need to use old words in new ways—I 
believe that you can understand quantum physics. Even if you cannot visualize what 
goes on in the microworld of atoms and molecules, you can grasp the beautiful and 
powerful physical laws that govern that world. After all, countless physicists have done 
it. 

This is our world. And welcome to it. 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 

... if you were acquainted with certain books on the subject, 

I could recall to your mind phrases 

which might explain a good deal 

in the manuscript that you have been reading. 

—from The White People 
by Arthur Machen 


Quantum Physics for Beginners 

If you like to read and are interested in quantum physics, you are in luck. Several 
excellent books on quantum physics for lay readers have recently hit the stands. I 
strongly recommend that you acquire at least one of these to supplement your study of 
this book: 

1. Hoffmann, Banesh, The Strange Story of the Quantum (Magnolia, Mass.: Peter Smith, 
1963). Originally published in 1947, this whimsical, often hilarious book was one of the 
first attempts to explain quantum physics to non-specialists. It is now available in a Dover 
paperback. 

2. Zukav, Gary, The Dancing Wu-Li Masters: An Overview of the New Physics (New York: 
Bantam, 1980). In spite of its title, this is not a book about mysticism. Zukav is not a 
physicist, but he has gone to considerable lengths to ensure accuracy in this lively account. 
His book covers a lot of territory, including relativity and elementary particle physics, with 
admirable enthusiasm. It is available in both mass-market (cheap) and trade (long-lasting) 
paperback editions. 

3. Pagels, Heinz R., The Cosmic Code: Quantum Physics as the Language of Nature (New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1982). (Available in paperback.) 

4. Gribbin, John, In Search of Schrodinger’s Cat: Quantum Physics and Reality (New York: 
Bantam, 1984). (Available in paperback.) 

5. Wolf, Fred Alan, Taking the Quantum Leap: The New Physics for Non-scientists (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1981). A lot of people like this whimsical introduction to quantum 
mechanics; in 1982 it won the American Book Award for the best original science paperback. 


Annotated Selected Readings 13 



6. Davies, Paul, Other Worlds: A Portrait of Nature in Rebellion (New York: Simon & Schus¬ 
ter, 1980). A fine introduction by a reliable British writer of popularizations. 

7. Davies, R. C. W., and J. R. Brown, eds.. The Ghost in the Atom (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1986). This collection of interviews with distinguished modern physicists, 
addressed to lay readers, offers provocative overviews of quantum physics and some of its 
more bizarre aspects. 

At a more advanced level than the above books, yet still accessible to persistent lay 
readers is 

8. Popper, Karl R., Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics (Totowa, N. J.: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 1982). 

Physics and Human Consciousness 

Some of the most provocative recent writings on the implications of quantum theory 
address the interface between physics and the human mind. Although the views expressed 
in these books are controversial, they are worth your serious consideration: 

9. Harth, Erich, Windows on the Mind: Reflections on the Physical Basis of Consciousness 
(New York: Quill, 1983). 

10. Wolf, Fred Alan, Star Wave: Mind, Consciousness, and Quantum Physics (New York: 
Macmillan, 1984). 

Finally, several books have appeared that probe what the authors perceive as parallels 
between modern physics and Eastern mysticism. Beware of these books! Most are 
incorrect and irresponsible in their claims about modern physics. The most interesting 
of the bunch, in my opinion, is 

11. Capra, Fritjof, The Tao of Physics, 2nd ed. (Boulder, Co.: Shambhala, 1983). 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 

“It sounds a dreadful prospect,” 
he commented. “Completely insane. 
As you say, though, 
it may be the only way out.” 

—from “Thirteen to Centaurus" 
by J. G. Ballard 


Exercises 

1.1 The Uncertainty Principle Strikes Back. 

The diameter of an atom in its ground state is roughly 1 A. Suppose we want to locate 
an electron in an atom; to do so using a microscope would require us to use radiation of 
wavelength A « 1 A. 

(a) From the wavelength of a photon, we can calculate its momentum using the de Broglie 
relation [see Eq. (2.16)] p = h/ A. Calculate the momentum of a photon corresponding 
to a wavelength of 1 A. 

(b) Suppose a photon with momentum p collides with the atomic electron. The amount of 
momentum transferred from the photon to the electron lies somewhere in the range from 
0 to p. Consequently, the electron is left with a momentum uncertainty Ap. What is Ap 
for the electron in this problem? 


14 


Chap. 1 Introductory 



(c) Using the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, calculate how accurately you could deter¬ 
mine the position of the electron in the atom. What does this calculation tell you about 
the advisability of using a microscope to try to “locate” an electron in an atom? 

1.2 Time Evolution of Uncertainty. 

The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Eq. (1.4) relates the uncertainties in the position and 
momentum of quantum particles at a particular time. But what happens to these uncertainties 
as time passes? 

To answer this question rigorously, we would need quantum mechanical machinery that 
we won’t learn until Part IV, but with our present knowledge we can get a rough idea based 
on a semi-classical analysis. 15 

Consider a beam of identical microscopic particles of mass m. The particles are free, i.e., 
they move (at a non-relativistic velocity) in the absence of external forces. For simplicity’s 
sake, we’ll consider only motion in one dimension, —oo < x < + 00 . Suppose the position 
of a particle at an initial time fo = 0 is known to within an uncertainty Axo about xo, and 
the initial momentum to within Apo about po. 

(a) How accurately can we determine the velocity at < 0 ? 

(b) Write down a classical expression for x(<), the position at time t > to, assuming that 
the position at to is xo and the momentum at this time is po- Express your answer in 
terms of xo, the initial velocity vo, and t. 

(c) Of course, the position at to is unknown to within the uncertainty Axo, and the momen¬ 
tum to within Ap 0 . From your answer to [b], determine upper and lower bounds on 
x(i). 

(d) Now, derive an expression for Ax(t) in terms of Axo, h, m, and t. 

(e) Suppose we work very hard to determine the position at to to great precision, so that 
Axo <C 1. What are the consequences of all this effort for our knowledge of the position 
at some time f > to? 

1.3 The Energy-Time Uncertainty Relation. 

Consider a beam of microscopic free particles, each of mass m, traveling along the x axis. 
In this chapter we noted the uncertainty relation (1.4) 

AxAp>ifi. (1.3.1) 

This relation expresses the limitation nature imposes on our ability to measure simultaneously 
the position and momentum of the particle. There is another uncertainty relation (which we 
shall study in §11.8), the energy-time uncertainty relation: 

A£A<>ift. (1.3.2) 

In the energy-time relation, A t is the time required to measure the energy E of a system, and 
A E is the uncertainty in the resulting value. In effect, this relation says that to measure an 
energy exactly would take forever. 

Since the energy and momentum of a free particle are related, we should expect these 
uncertainty relations to be related. Derive the energy-time uncertainty relation (1.3.2) from 
the position-momentum uncertainty relation (1.3.1). Be sure to explain or justify each step of 
your derivation. (Consider very small uncertainties A E and Ap.) 

Hint: If the particle moves through a distance Ax in a time interval At, then Ax = (p/m)At. 


15 A semi-classical analysis is one in which classical physics is discretely and carefully used for certain 
aspects of a quantum problem. Applied correctly, semi-classical techniques can yield accurate approximations 
to a full quantal analysis. Applied indiscriminately or without thought, they can yield utter garbage. Caveat 
emptor. 


Exercises and Problems 15 



1.4 Revenge of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. 

A locomotive engine is at rest in a train yard. The locomotive is macroscopic, so we can see 
that it is at rest and where it is— i.e., we know its position with certainty. Suppose we use 
the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle to estimate the position uncertainty Ax. Consider the 
following argument: 

Since the engine is at rest, its momentum p is zero. Moreover, since A p = 0, 
the uncertainty in its position is infinite. Therefore the position of the locomotive 
is completely unknown. 

It would seem that the HUP has let us down, for it has led to a conclusion that directly 
contradicts the experience of our own eyes. Find the flaw in the above argument. 

Problems 

1.1 Testing the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. 

An ambitious undergraduate decides to check out the uncertainty principle for macroscopic 
systems. He goes to the top of the University clock tower and drops a marble (of mass m) to 
the ground, trying to hit one of the (many) cracks in the pavement beneath him. To aim his 
marble, he teeters precariously directly over the desired crack and uses a very sophisticated 
apparatus of the highest possible precision, which he has borrowed from one of the superbly 
equipped freshman physics laboratories. 

(a) Alas, try as he might, the student cannot hit the crack. Prove that the marble will 
inevitably miss the crack by an average distance of the order of [h/{2mn)]^{H/g )^, 
where g is the acceleration due to gravity and H is the height of the tower. 

(b) Assuming reasonable values for H and m, evaluate the order of magnitude of the 
distance in part (a) in MKS units. 

(c) Discuss your result in terms of the Correspondence Principle. 

1.2 No Rest for the Weary (in the Microworld). 

One of the most extraordinary features of microscopic systems is that if they are bound {i.e., 
confined by forces) they can never be at rest. The explanation for this bizarre fact, as for so 
many bizarre features of the microworld, is related to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. 
The state of minimum total energy of a system is its ground state. The ground-state energy 
of a system is its zero-point energy. Consider a beam of particles of mass in moving in one 
dimension. Suppose their potential energy is that of a simple harmonic oscillator of natural 
frequency a>o, 

V(x) = -^IIVjJqX 2 . 

Use the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle to derive an approximate expression for the ground- 
state energy of the particles in the beam. 

Hint: The average momentum of the particles as they undergo simple harmonic motion is 
zero, so the value of their momentum is of the order h/ Ax. 

1.3 Quantum Ideas Incarnate: The Particle in a Box. 

Consider an ensemble that consists of a huge number of identical systems. Each system is 
a particle of mass m confined to a one-dimensional square well of width L. The potential 
energy of such a particle is 

I oo x < - % 

0 -•£ < a < 7 

OO x > j 


16 Chap. 1 Introductory 


(a) From arguments based on the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle derive an expression for 
the minimum kinetic energy T min that the particle can have. Provide a clear, complete 
explanation of your reasoning. 

(b) Calculate the minimum kinetic energy of an electron that is confined to a nucleus. Take 
as the diameter of the nucleus the typical value 10 fenni. Express your answer in MeV. 
Hint: The dimensions of a nucleus correspond to a very small infinite square well. From 
your answer to part (a) what qualitative conclusion can you draw about the magnitude 
of the kinetic energy and hence of the velocity of the particle? 

(c) In early studies of beta decay, nuclei were observed to emit electrons with energies of 
several hundred keV. Initially, these observations were taken as evidence that electrons 
are the building blocks of nuclei. Comment briefly on this hypothesis, basing your 
remarks on your answer to part (b). 

(d) Suppose the mass of the particle is m = 1 milligram and the width of the box is L = 
0.1 mm. Evaluate the minimum energy in eV. Can the fact that E m \ n ^ 0 for this system 
be observed? Why or why not? 

1.4 Yet Another Uncertainty Relation. 

Consider a microscopic particle of mass in that moves in a circle of radius r. Let A L denote 
the uncertainty in the angular momentum of the particle and A 9 the uncertainty in its angular 
displacement. Derive the following uncertainty principle: 

ALA0 > ift. 

Be sure to explain and justify each step of your derivation. 

1.5 A Not Particularly Realistic Application of the HUP. 

Use the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle to estimate how long an ordinary lead pencil can 
be balanced upright on its point. 


Exercises and Problems 


17 



CHAPTER 2 


Into the Microworld 

Duality and the Double Slit 


2.1 Waves versus Particles 

* 2.2 On The Nature of Light 

* 2.3 Understanding Diffraction the Classical Way 

* 2.4 Understanding Interference 

2.5 Double Trouble 

2.6 It All Started with de Broglie 

2.7 The Controversial Concept of Complimentarity 

2.8 Final Thoughts: A Few Words About Words 


I have no data yet. 

It is a capital mistake to theorize 
before one has data. Insensibly 
one begins to twist facts to suit theories, 
instead of theories to suit facts. 

—Sherlock Holmes to Dr. Watson 
in A Scandal in Bohemia 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 


Quantum physics is chock full of bizarre, non-classical ideas; weird concepts haunt 
nearly every section of this book. Three of these ideas— quantization , uncertainty , and 
duality —deserve special treatment, for they are the bedrock of quantum theory. 

Quantization is probably familiar to you, but you wouldn’t have encountered it in 
a classical physics book. The observables of macroscopic systems are not quantized. 
The energy of a ball on a string, the linear momentum of a hockey puck, and the angular 
momentum of an astronaut in a centrifuge—all can take on any of a continuum of values, 
subject only to whatever constraints are imposed by forces acting on the system. In the 
macroscopic world nature is continuous. 

Not so in the microworld, where there is abundant evidence that nature is inherently 
discrete. Physicists have been aware of this fact since pre-quantum days. By 1900, for 
example, spectroscopists knew that radiation was emitted by atoms and molecules at 
discrete frequencies. But the first direct evidence of quantization of energy appeared in 
collision experiments performed in the early 1900’s by James Franck (1882-1964) and 
Gustav Hertz (1887-1975). 1 

For several years, Franck and Hertz had been measuring the ionization potentials 
of atoms, and this experience influenced their interpretation of the results of their col¬ 
lision experiments. 2 In these experiments, they scattered electrons from various atoms; 
for example, in their most famous experiment, Franck and Hertz accelerated electrons 
emerging from a heated platinum wire, and sent the resulting beam through a gas of 
mercury vapor. By measuring the current in the scattered electron beam as a function 
of the energy of the incident electrons, Franck and Hertz could study the energy loss 
suffered by the electrons in their collisions with atoms of the gas. They found that the 
scattered current exhibited a series of sharp drops, each occurring at an incident energy 
equal to an integral multiple of 4.9 eV. 

Franck and Hertz were initially led astray by their prior experience studying ioniza¬ 
tion; they concluded that 4.9 eV is the ionization potential of mercury. But Neils Bohr, 
on learning of Franck and Hertz’s results, realized that the electrons were not ionizing 
the mercury atoms but rather were exciting them—losing energy to the atoms through 
inelastic collisions. Drawing on his model of the atom, Bohr further deduced that the 
energy spacing at which the current drops occur, 4.9 eV, is the separation of two discrete 
energy levels of the mercury atom. 3 

In 1914, when Franck and Hertz reported their work, physicists thought that it 
supported the Bohr theory of the atom—which has since been superseded by quantum 

Gustav was the nephew of Heinrich Hertz, whom we’ll meet in § 2.1. 

2 For a detailed account of the Franck-Hertz experiment, see § 3.5 of Introduction to Modern Physics, 
2nd ed. by J. D. McGervey (New York: Academic Press, 1983). 

^Recent precise measurements of the energy separation between the ground state and the first excited 
stale of mercury give the value 4.86 eV. The ionization potential of mercury, by the way, is 10.43 eV. 



theory. 4 Nevertheless, the Franck-Hertz experiment stands as one of the first demonstra¬ 
tions of energy quantization in atoms, a striking example of non-classical shenanigans in 
the microworld. 

Another underlying concept of this world is uncertainty. In Chap. 1, I showed 
you an example of this principle: Nature imposes a peculiar indeterminacy on any 
attempt to simultaneously measure the position and momentum of a quantum particle. 
The mathematical manifestation of this indeterminacy is the Heisenberg Uncertainty 
Principle , which we’ll return to (and derive) in Chap. 4. 

Duality , the third great quantum idea, is the focus of this chapter. Wave-particle 
duality is one of the more confounding ideas of quantum physics, for it most directly 
challenges our classical intuition about how the world behaves. But we must face the 
challenge of duality; before we can begin to understand the ways of the microworld, we 
must disabuse ourselves of the idea that quantum particles can be understood as either 
classical particles or classical waves. The essence of wave-particle duality is beautifully 
encapsulated in a single experiment, the famous double-slit experiment. After laying 
some background in § 2.1-2.3, we’ll investigate this provocative experiment in § 2.4. 

2.1 WAVES VERSUS PARTICLES 

The behavior of a microscopic “particle” differs in subtle ways from that of a classical 
particle; in some respects, it resembles the behavior of a classical wave. So before we 
plunge into the microworld, let’s remind ourselves of the classical pictures of particles 
and waves. 

In Chap. 1 we reviewed the characteristics of a classical particle and the analysis 
of its motion using Newtonian mechanics. For example, a macroscopic particle has a 
well-defined position and linear momentum at any time, and from these observables we 
can calculate its energy. Essential to this description is the notion of spatial localization. 
The idea that a particle is a localized thing is implicit, for example, in the description 
of transport of energy through space by a particle in a localized lump. This quality of 
the classical description of a particle is, in turn, reflected in the “state descriptor” of 
Newtonian theory: the trajectory. 

The characteristics of a wave are quite different from those of a particle. A wave 
is not spatially localized—this quality is reflected in the properties by which we char¬ 
acterize a wave, such as the wavelength. Like a particle, a wave carries energy and 
momentum, but it does so in a non-localized manner, distributed over a wavefront. And 
a wave exhibits distinctive, non-particle-like behavior such as diffraction, interference, 
and polarization. Not surprisingly, then, the theory classical physicists use to describe 
the propagation of a wave and its interaction with matter—the electromagnetic theory of 
James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879)—is quite different from that of Newtonian particle 
dynamics. So at the macroscopic level, classical physics elegantly and cleanly separates 
into wave mechanics and particle dynamics. 

Alas, this division does not apply to microscopic particles, which adamantly refuse 
to adhere to either the classical wave model or the classical particle model. In some 
circumstances microscopic particles behave according to the laws of classical mechanics. 

4 Although the Bohr model of the atom, the heart of what is called “the old quantum theory,” is of 
enormous historical importance, we shall not study it, because this model is almost 100% wrong. For a good 
treatment, see Chap. 4 of Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles, 3rd ed. by R. 
Eisberg and R. Resnick (New York: Wiley, 1985). 


20 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



For example, some collisions of highly energetic atoms with molecules can be explained 
by using classical collision theory. Yet, in other circumstances quantum particles behave 
like waves: e.g., electrons that have been scattered by a crystal exhibit a diffraction 
pattern when they are detected. Analysis of this pattern reveals that in this experiment 
the electrons propagate precisely as though they had a well-defined wavelength and 
frequency ... as though they are waves. 5 

“This situation,” you may be thinking, “is a mess. You tell me that light isn’t 
a wave. And electrons aren’t particles. Well, then, what are they? And how can I 
understand the behavior of electrons if not with Newtonian mechanics, and of waves if 
not with Maxwell’s theory? What is going on here?" 

*2.2 ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT 


Remember, 

light and shadow never stand still. 

—John Constable, 

19th century landscape artist. 

To probe deeper into wave-particle duality, we’re going to trip lightly through the history 
of man’s evolving ideas about the nature of electromagnetic radiation. This overview 
need not be comprehensive; you can find several excellent, more complete historical 
accounts in the Suggested Readings list for this chapter. 

^ Corpuscular theories of light, which treated light as though it were composed 
of particles, have been batting around since the days of Newton and Laplace. But 
light has an irritating tendency to exhibit distinctively non-particle-like behavior, such as 
diffraction and interference, which corpuscular theories could not explain. Once Maxwell 
introduced his wave theory of electromagnetic radiation (in 1870) and it became clear 
that this theory could beautifully explain such phenomena, most physicists abandoned 
corpuscular theories of light. 

— ^ According to Maxwell, all electromagnetic radiation—light included—consists of 
real waves propagating through space, waves that carry energy distributed over con¬ 
tinuous, non-localized spherical wave fronts. In the late 19th century, it seemed that 
Maxwell’s theory could explain even the most complicated electromagnetic phenomena; 
so convincing were its successes that in 1886, the distinguished physicist Heinrich Hertz 
(1857-1894)—uncle of Gustav—wrote: “the wave theory of light is, from the point of 
view of human beings, a certainty.” Hertz, as we shall see, was wrong. 6 

Walking the Planck 

It was Albert Einstein (1879-1955) who, in 1905, resurrected the notion that electromag¬ 
netic radiation is particle-like rather than wave like in nature. But where did this idea 
originate? Einstein has written that the seeds of his 1905 theory were planted by research 

5 Never let it be said that physics is without irony. The fact that electrons propagate like waves was 
demonstrated in 1927 by G. P. Thompson (1892-1975). By scattering electrons through a thin gold foil, he 
conclusively verified the wave nature of the electron , and, in 1937, received the Nobel prize. Several years 
before, in 1906, G. P.’s father, J. J. Thompson (1856-1940), won the Nobel prize for discovering the electron 
(1897) and for measuring its charge to mass ratio. J. J.’s experiment was interpreted as conclusive proof of 
the particle nature of the electron. 

6 “When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost certainly 
right. When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.”—Arthur C. Clarke, in Profiles 
of the Future. 


Sec. 2.2 On the Nature of Light 21 




carried out at the turn of the century by the German physicist Max Planck (1858-1947). 
Although encouraged by his physics teacher to pursue a career as a musician, Planck 
persevered in physics. His teacher’s advice was lousy; Planck’s studies of radiation 
inside a heated cavity led, via a line of reasoning he himself described as an “act of 
desperation,” to the concept of quantization of energy and thence to the birth of quantum 
physics. 

Planck did not set out to revolutionize physics. Instead, following in the footsteps 
of his teacher G. R. Kirchhoff (1824-1887), he sought to understand why hot bodies 
glow. This phenomenon, which is called black-body radiation, may be familiar to you 
if you sculpt. Suppose you have crafted a clay pig. To harden the clay, you fire the 
pig— i.e., put it in a kiln (an oven) and heat to roughly 2000° F for about 10 to 12 hours. 
Suppose there is a tiny hole in the oven, too small to admit light but large enough to 
see through. At first, of course, you see darkness. But as the pig gets hotter and hotter, 
it begins to glow. As the temperature of the kiln further increases, this glow becomes 
orange, then yellow, then white, and fills the oven, obliterating all detail of the pig. 
Why? 

Planck fonnulated this question in slightly more abstract terms, asking: what is the 
spectrum of electromagnetic radiation inside a heated cavity ? More specifically: how 
does this spectrum depend on the temperature T of the cavity, on its shape, size, and 
chemical makeup, and on the frequency v of the electromagnetic radiation in it? By 
the time Planck got into the game, part of the answer was known. Kirchhoff and others 
had shown that once the radiation in the cavity attains equilibrium with the walls, the 
energy in the field depends on u and T but, surprisingly, is independent of physical 
characteristics of the cavity such as its size, shape, or chemical composition. 

The cavity, of course, encompasses a finite volume. Planck was interested in the 
radiative energy inside the cavity, not on effects that depend on its volume, so he worked 
in tenns of an energy density. In particular, he sought an expression for the radiative 
energy density per unit volume p{v,T). If we multiply this quantity by an infinitesimal 
element of frequency, we obtain p(r/, T)dv, the energy per unit volume in the radiation 
field with frequencies between v and v + du at cavity temperature T. 

Rather than confront the distracting complexities of a real heated cavity, Planck 
based his work on a model originally introduced by his mentor Kirchhoff. Kirchhoff 
called his model of a heated cavity in thermal equilibrium a “black-body radiator.” A 
black body is simply anything that absorbs all radiation incident on it. Thus, a black- 
body radiator neither reflects nor transmits; it just absorbs or emits. 

From the work of W. Wien (1864-1928), Planck knew that the radiative energy 
density p(i/,T) for a black body is proportional to u 3 and, from the work of J. Stefan 
(1835-1893), that the integrated energy density / 0 °° p(v>T)dv is proportional to T 4 . 
But this information did not fully describe the dependence of p{v,T) on v and T; 
experimental evidence implied a further, unknown dependence on v/T. 

Wien had actually proposed an equation for the energy density of a black-body 
radiator, but the theoretical foundation of his theory was shaky. Moreover, his equation 
worked only in certain circumstances; it correctly explained the v and T dependence of 
p{v,T) for low temperatures and high frequencies. But it predicted that heated black 
bodies should emit a blue glow at all temperatures—a prediction confounded by our pig. 
Planck knew of this defect in Wien’s theory, for experiments published in 1901 by H. 
Rubens and F. Kurlbaum conclusively showed it to fail for high temperatures and low 
frequencies. 


22 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



In his research, Planck focused on the exchange of energy between the radiation 
field and the walls. He developed a simple model of this process by imagining that 
the molecules of the cavity walls are “resonators”—electrical charges undergoing simple 
harmonic motion. As a consequence of their oscillations, these charges emit electro¬ 
magnetic radiation at their oscillation frequency, which, at thermal equilibrium, equals 
the frequency v of the radiation field. According to classical electromagnetic theory, 
energy exchange between the resonators and the walls is a continuous process— i.e., the 
oscillators can exchange any amount of energy with the field, provided, of course, that 
energy is conserved in the process. 

By judiciously applying classical thermodynamics and a healthy dose of physical 
intuition to his model, Planck deduced an empirical fonnula for the radiative energy 
density: 7 


P&T) 


Av 3 

e Du/T _ j • 


( 2 . 1 ) 


In this equation, A and B are constants to be determined by fitting to experimental data; 
that’s why it is called “empirical.” 

Equation (2.1) agreed beautifully with experimental data for a wide range of fre¬ 
quencies and temperatures. And, in the limit u —► oo and T —> 0, it reduced properly 
to Wien’s law. But Planck was concerned that he could not rigorously justify his for¬ 
mula. In a letter dated 1931, he wrote of his dissatisfaction: “a theoretical interpretation 
had to be supplied, at all costs, no matter how high ... I was ready to sacrifice every 
one of my previous convictions about physical laws.” Planck had to do just that. 

For his second assault on the energy density of a black body, Planck adopted a sta¬ 
tistical method based on the concept of entropy as interpreted probabilistically by Ludvig 
Boltzmann (1844-1906). At one point in his derivation, Planck introduced a simplifying 
assumption (i.e., a trick to facilitate his mathematics). His ploy was conventional in 
mathematical analysis, and Planck expected to remove his assumption at the end. Planck 
was in for a rude shock. 

His assumption is both simple and radical. He knew that a classical black body 
could exchange any amount of energy with the walls of the cavity; nevertheless, for 
purposes of his derivation, Planck assumed that only discrete amounts of energy can be 
absorbed or emitted by the resonators that comprise the walls of the black body. He called 
these discrete amounts of energy “quanta.” To each quantum Planck assigned an energy 
equal to an integral multiple of ha, where h is the constant h = 6.63 x 10~ 31 J-sec. 

Having made this assumption, Planck easily derived the radiation law 


p(v>T) 


8nu 2 ha 

ghv/kuT — 1 ’ 


( 2 . 2 ) 


where c = 3.0 x 10 8 m-sec is the speed of light and ko = 1.38 x 10 _23 J-K -1 is 
Boltzmann’s constant. Comparing this result with Eq. (2.1), we see that in his new 
equation Planck derived expressions for the constants A and B that appeared in his 
empirical form. 


7 You can find a very nice account of Planck’s analysis in Chap. I of The Quantum Physicists and an 
Introduction to Their Physics by William H. Cropper (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970). 


Sec. 2.2 On the Nature of Light 23 



This derivation was the theoretical justification Planck sought for the distribution 
of radiation in a black body. But in laying the foundation for his theory, Planck paid 
an enormous price, for try as he might, he could not get rid of his artificial constant h. 
Setting h = 0 inevitably led to a result that disagreed with a huge body of experimental 
data. Yet, if h is non-zero , then Planck’s theory is seriously at odds with physicists’ 
understanding of energy exchange as a continuous process. 

Planck’s rash assumption heralded the strange new physics of the quantum, which 
dominated the physics community for the next three decades. But physicists, who were 
then and are today a rather conservative lot, did not take well to being told that their 
understanding of so basic a process as energy exchange was fundamentally incorrect. 
Attempts to derive Planck’s result without making his drastic assumption failed, and for 
several years Planck’s quanta languished in obscurity, largely ignored. Yet, Planck’s 
assumption was nothing compared to the suiprise Einstein had in store. 

Particles of Light 

Einstein thought he saw an inconsistency in the way Planck used Maxwell’s wave theory 
of electromagnetic radiation in his derivation. With characteristic intellectual courage, 
Einstein decided that this inconsistency implied a flaw not in Planck’s theory but in 
Maxwell’s. This radical contention shifted the emphasis in research on black bodies 
from the resonators that comprise the walls to the radiation field itself. Ultimately, it 
completely altered the way we think about light. 8 

In 1905 Einstein proposed that the energy in an electromagnetic field is not spread 
out over a spherical wave front, as Maxwell would have it, but instead is localized in 
indivisible clumps—in quanta. Each quantum of frequency v, Einstein averred, travels 
through space at the speed of light, c = 3.0 x 10 8 m-sec, carrying a discrete amount 
of energy hv and momentum hv/c. Thus, in Einstein’s model, light transports energy 
in the same way particles do. G. N. Lewis subsequently dubbed Einstein’s quantum of 
radiation energy a photon , the name we use today. 

The photon model cast Planck’s theory of black-body radiation in, so to speak, a 
new light. Planck thought that energy exchange between the resonators of the cavity 
and the field occurs in units of hv because of some strange property of the resonators. 
To this Einstein said: No; the explanation is that the radiation field itself is quantized. 
Planck’s result is consistent with this extraordinary notion; if the energy in the field is 
contained in photons—quanta of magnitude hv —then of course only integral multiples 
of the photon energy can be exchanged with the walls. 

The photon model explained more than just black-body radiation. One of Einstein’s 
greatest achievements was using it to understand the photoelectric effect —the ejection 
of electrons from a metal, such as sodium, when light impinges on it. (You see the 
photoelectric effect in action every time an electric eye opens an elevator door for you 
or closes one on your foot.) Yet, the photon was too radical for physicists of the early 
1900’s, and Einstein’s model of the electromagnetic field encountered strong opposition. 
Even as late as 1913—years after the publication of Einstein’s work on the photoelectric 
effect—four distinguished German physicists (including Max Planck) wrote in a petition 
recommending Einstein’s appointment to the Prussian Academy of Science: 

8 Einstein’s radical theory of light grew out of his study of the entropy of high-frequency radiation in a 
low-temperature cavity. For a readable account of this background research, see The Quantum Physicists and 
an Introduction to their Physics by William H. Cropper (London: Oxford University Press, 1970). 


24 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



... That he may sometimes have missed the target in his speculations, as, for example, 
in his hypothesis of light quanta, cannot really be held too much against him, for it is 
not possible to introduce fundamentally new ideas, even in the most exact sciences, 
without occasionally taking a risk. 


One year later the American experimentalist R. A. Millikan (1868-1953) reported a 
precise verification of Einstein’s equation for the energy of a photon, E = ho, and 
the first measurement of Planck’s constant. Yet physicists still resisted abandoning their 
long-cherished idea that light was a wave. 

Then, in 1923, Arthur H. Compton (1892-1962) published the results of his x-ray 
scattering experiments, and drove the last nail into the coffin of the wave theory of light. 
Compton scattered x-rays—electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength around 10~ 10 m 
and a frequency around 10 18 sec -1 —from a thin layer of a light element such as carbon 
and measured the shift in the wavelength of the x-rays due to the scattering. His results 
were seriously at odds with the predictions of Maxwell’s beleaguered theory. 

Compton’s data clearly showed that the wavelength of the scattered radiation is 
larger than that of the incident radiation. After several foredoomed attempts to explain 
this result with classical theory, Compton tried the photon idea. If x-rays carry en¬ 
ergy in localized clumps, he reasoned, then we can apply classical collision theory to 
their interaction with the electrons of the target. Compton used the classical laws of 
conservation of energy and linear momentum—as though he were analyzing a game of 
billiards—and was able to derive the correct expression for the wavelength shift. This 
analysis vindicated Einstein’s idea. It was too much even for diehards: the photon was 
accepted. 

What is Light? 


Einstein’s brilliant notion still does not fully illuminate the nature of light. The photon 
is a particle-like model, but clearly light does not actually consist of classical particles. 
Particles do not diffract. They don’t interfere. But light does. Yet, this model demolishes 
the idea that light is a classical wave. Indeed, the nature of electromagnetic radiation 
after Einstein seemed more ephemeral than ever; depending on the physical conditions, 
light seemed to behave either like a wave or like a particle. J. J. Thompson wrote that 
the conflict between these two models was like “a struggle between a tiger and a shark; 
each is supreme in his own element, but helpless in that of the other.” 

The more you think about wave-particle duality, the more befuddling it seems. If 
you are new to this idea, you can probably imagine the shock, frustration, and confusion 
that the interpretive problems of duality induced during the early years of quantum theory. 
Banesh Hoffmann has written of the impact of this puzzle on physicists of the time: 9 


They could but make the best of it, and went around with woebegone faces sadly 
complaining that on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays they must look on light as a 
wave; on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays as a particle. On Sundays, they simply 
prayed. 


9 See his delightful and often hilarious book The Strange Story of the Quantum, (New York: Dover, 

1959). 


Sec. 2.2 On the Nature of Light 


25 



*2.3 UNDERSTANDING DIFFRACTION THE CLASSICAL WAY 


Diffraction, which was first observed by Leonardo da Vinci, is often considered to be the 
signature of a wave. Diffraction occurs when ripples in a pond encounter a pair of logs 
that are close together, when light passes through a narrow slit in a window shade, or 
when x-rays scatter from a crystal. In each case, we can explain the distinctive pattern 
that forms using classical wave theory. Understand what happens to a wave when it 
passes through a small aperture—that is, understand diffraction—and you are well on 
your way to understanding the behavior of waves in more complicated situations. In this 
section. I’ll refresh your memory about this characteristic wave phenomena. 10 

A schematic of a single-slit diffraction experiment with light is shown in Fig. 2.1. 
Monochromatic light of frequency v is incident on a diaphragm in which there is a single 
slit of width w. We’ll assume that the light source is far to the left of the diaphragm, 
so the incident radiation can be represented by a plane wave. The width of the slit 
must be small compared to the wavelength A = c /is of the radiation if the slit is to 
appreciably diffract the light; for example, to diffract visible light enough to observe this 
phenomenon, we require a slit of width w « 1CT 4 cm. Light scattered by the diaphragm 
falls on a detector, such as a photographic plate or a photocell, located at a distance D 
far to the right of the slit. The detector measures the energy delivered by the scattered 
wave as a function of the distance x in Fig. 2.1. 



Figure 2.1 A highly simplified single-slit 
diffraction apparatus. At the detector, the 
distance x is measured from a point on a 
perpendicular from the midpoint of the 
slit. The analysis of this experiment is 
performed in terms of the radial distance r 
from the midpoint of the slit to the point x 
and the corresponding angle 0. (In this 
figure, the ratio of the slit width w to the 
distance D from the diaphragm to the 
detector has been exaggerated; in an actual 
double-slit experiment, D » to.) 


Light scattered by the single-slit diaphragm forms a beautiful diffraction pattern at 
the detector. This pattern is characterized by a very bright central band located directly 
opposite to the slit, surrounded by a series of alternating light and dark regions. The 
light regions on either side of the central band are called secondary bands , because 
they are much less intense than the central band. Indeed, the intensity of the secondary 
bands drops off so dramatically on either side of the central band that only one pair of 
secondary bands is visible. Additional weak secondary bands exist, though, as you can 
see in Fig. 2.2, which is a graph of the intensity measured by the detector. If we play 
around with the frequency control on the light source and study the resulting diffraction 

10 If you recently studied classical wave mechanics, you needn’t read this review or that in §2.4. Just 
glance at Eqs. (2.4) and (2.8) and press on to §2.6. If you need more review than is provided here, seek out 
nearly any undergraduate physics textbook. Several useful references can be found in this chapter’s Selected 
Readings list. 


26 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 









3\ 


w sin 0 



Figure 2.2 The diffraction intensity (2.4) for a single-slit (Fraunhofer) pattern plotted 
as a function of to sin 0. 


patterns, we discover that the separation between adjacent bright bands is proportional 
to the wavelength A of the incident radiation. 

A classical physicist would call upon Maxwell’s electromagnetic wave theory to 
explain the pattern in Fig. 2.2. To understand qualitatively what happens when a plane 
wave passes through a diaphragm we invoke Huygens’s Principle, which lets us replace 
the plane wave and the slit (in our mind’s eye) by a large number of closely-spaced, dis¬ 
crete radiating charges that fill the region of space where the slit is located. 11 “Scattered 
waves” radiated by different oscillators— i.e., waves that emerge from different locations 
in the slit region—have different phases, so the superposition of these scattered waves 
exhibits regions of high and low intensity, as in Fig. 2.2. 

To put this reasoning on a quantitative footing, we would first use Maxwell’s theory 
to derive an expression for the electric field at a point (?-, 6) on the detector (see Fig. 2.1). 
But the quantity measured in this experiment is not the electric field; it is the intensity — 
the rate at which the scattered radiation delivers energy to the detector. This quantity 
is proportional to the time-averaged energy flux — i.e., to the average over one period of 
the square of the modulus of the electric field. I’ll denote by I s \ ng \ c {6) the intensity at a 
fixed value of r due to radiation scattered by a single slit. 

Omitting the details of the derivation of / S in g ie(0)> I’ll just quote the result. 12 For 
convenience, I’ll write the intensity in terms of its value 7 () at the principal maximum— 
i.e., at the point r = D, 9 = 0, in the central peak in Fig. 2.2—and the handy 
intermediate quantity 


ws\n 6 


a = 7T 


A 


(2.3) 


where, of course, A is the wavelength of the incident radiation. With these definitions, 
the single-slit intensity at fixed r is 


■^siii g lo($) — /() 



(2.4) 


11 For more on Huygens’s Principle, see Chap. 9 of Wares by Frank S. Crawford (New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1968). 

12 See, for example, § 12.8 and 12.9 of Classical Electromagnetic Radiation by Jerry B. Marion (New 
York: Academic Press, 1965). 


Sec. 2.3 Understanding Diffraction the Classical Way 27 



The intensity (2.4) is graphed in Fig. 2.2 as a function of iusin0: plotted this way, 
/singled) exhibits a characteristic pattern of equally-spaced nodes [wl ire /single(#) = 0], 
which occur at 

wsm 0 = ±n\ for n = 1,2,3,... [nodes in / s i ng ie(0)]- (2.5a) 

The principal (zeroth-order) maximum of the intensity pattern occurs at 6 = 0, and 
higher order maxima occur (approximately) at 

lusinfl — ^ A for n = 1,2,3,... [maxima in J sing)e (0)]. (2.5 b) 

Equation (2.4) fully accounts for the properties of patterns such as the one in 
Fig. 2.2. Thus does classical electromagnetic theory rend the veil of mystery from the 
phenomenon of diffraction. 


*2.4 UNDERSTANDING INTERFERENCE 

The theory of diffraction is the foundation for study of the double-slit interference exper¬ 
iment. When first performed in 1800 by Thomas Young (1773-1829), this experiment 
was considered definitive proof of the wave nature of light. We can modify the single-slit 
apparatus of Fig. 2.1 to suit Young’s experiment by simply cutting a second slit in the 
diaphragm. 

As shown in Fig. 2.3, the width of the second slit is the same as that of the first, 
w. We must position the second slit so that the two slits are close together—but not too 
close: for observable interference to occur, the slit separation s must be greater than w. 
Again, we shine a beam of monochromatic light of frequency v on the diaphragm and 
see what happens at the detector, which is far to the right of the diaphragm. 



Figure 2.3 Schematic of a double-slit 
apparatus for Young’s interference 
experiment. The distance r to an 
observation point on the detector is 
measured from the midpoint of the part of 
the diaphragm separating the two slits. 


This time, our detector shows an interference pattern like the one in Fig. 2.4. At 
first glance, this figure may look similar to the diffraction pattern of Fig. 2.2, but on 
closer examination we see striking differences. For one thing, the interference pattern 
exhibits more bright bands than the diffraction pattern. This means that the energy of 
the radiation scattered by the double-slit diaphragm is more evenly distributed than that 
scattered by a single slit. (In the diffraction pattern about 90% of the energy appears 
in the central band.) Finally, the individual bands in the interference pattern, which are 
called interference fringes, are narrower than those of the diffraction pattern. 


28 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



If we study how the interference pattern changes as we fiddle with the incident 
wavelength A, the slit separation s, and the slit width w, we discover that the separation 
between the bright bands increases with increasing A—just as it did in the diffraction 
pattern, for which the separation is proportional to X/w. But also we find a difference: 
the separation in Fig. 2.4 is independent of the slit width w but is inversely proportional 
to the slit separation s. 



Figure 2.4 The double-slit interference 
intensity function /doubled) [Eq- (2.6)] 
for s » A. (This condition produces 
several maxima in a small region of 0.) 
The angular interval between successive 
maxima is A/s. 


The key to understanding interference is superposition. When the incident plane 
wave encounters the double-slit diaphragm it “splits,” and a diffracted wave emerges 
from each slit. (In a sense, each slit becomes a source of radiation that travels to the 
detector.) These waves add in the region between the slit and the detector, and this device 
measures the intensity of their superposition. Now, at the detector the amplitudes of the 
electric fields of the diffracted waves are equal, but their phases are not. Consequently, 
their superposition manifests regions of constructive and destructive interference, as seen 
in Fig. 2.4. 

The trick to deriving an equation for the intensity measured in the double-slit 
experiment—which we’ll call /doubled)—is therefore to add the electric fields of the 
waves diffracted by each slit. (This step is legitimate because Maxwell’s equation for 
these fields is linear.) Having done so, we could calculate the aforementioned phase 
difference and would find the field from the lower slit lags the field from the upper slit 
by an amount (27rs/A)sin0. The last step is to average the squared modulus of the total 
electric field at a point ( r , 0) on the detector over one period, which yields 


^double (0) = 4/(j 


sin (tT™^) 

W 



( 2 - 6 ) 


Now this, I would argue, is a curious result. For one thing, 7 0 in Eq. (2.6) is the 
maximum intensity we would obtain in the diffraction pattern of a single slit of width 
w — i.e., the very quantity J 0 we used in Eq. (2.4). Looking deeper, we find buried in 
Eq. (2.6) the single-slit intensity / s i» g ie(0). To unearth this function, I’ll use the definition 
(2.4) of a and introduce yet another intermediate quantity 


Aip = 2 tt 


ssin# 

A 


With these definitions the double-slit intensity (2.6) stands revealed as 


(2.7) 


^double (0) — 4/ s j ng | e (0) COS 



( 2 . 8 ) 


Sec. 2.4 Understanding Interference 29 



This analysis explains the complicated oscillations we see in / ( i<, u i>ie(0) as 6 is 
varied (Fig. 2.4). This structure is compounded of two separate oscillations, one due to 
the single-slit intensity /singled)—which depends on the slit width w but not, of course, 
on the separation—the other due to factor cos 2 (irf sin#). The separation s of the two 
slits is greater than their width w, so the latter oscillation is the more rapid of the two. In 
fact, the slower oscillation of the single-slit intensity forms the envelope of the double-slit 
intensity, as you can see in Fig. 2.5. 



Figure 2.5 The double-slit intensity (solid curve) and its envelope, the single-slit in¬ 
tensity (dashed curve). For this graph, we have chosen s = 3u;/2. 


The double-slit pattern is more complicated than the single-slit pattern. And, as 
you might expect, even more elaborate interference patterns can be generated by using 
diaphragms with more than two slits. But no matter how baroque the resulting patterns, 
they can be explained by Maxwell’s electromagnetic wave theory. 

But wait! According to Einstein, a light beam consists of photons and there¬ 
fore transports energy in spatially-localized clumps with particle-like properties. But no 
model based on particle dynamics can explain interference—or, for that matter, diffrac¬ 
tion. 13 The implications of our double-slit experiment appear to contradict Einstein’s 
theory of light. 


13 We might, for example, argue that a diffraction pattern could result from particle-like scattering 
of photons from the edges of a single slit. This argument sounds good at first, but when translated into a 
quantitative prediction, it leads to an intensity that does not agree with experiment. For a delightful account 
of this argument see Chap. 6 of The Character of Physical Law by R. P. Feynman (Cambridge, Mass.: 
M. I. T. Press, 1965). 


30 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 


Yet, a model based purely on classical wave theory is also inadequate, for it cannot 
explain phenomena such as the photoelectric effect and x-ray (Compton) scattering. 
These experiments support a model in which light interacts with other subatomic particles 
(e.g., electrons) according to the laws of classical particle dynamics. 

Maybe we can resolve this conundrum by performing the double-slit experiment 
using a beam of particles —say, electrons. The behavior of these particles in the experi¬ 
ment should differ strikingly from that of light. This is a good idea, but, as we’ll see in 
the next section, the experiment deepens rather than solves the mystery. 


2.5 DOUBLE TROUBLE 


Now is not this ridiculous— 
and is not this preposterous? 
A thorough-paced absurdity— 
explain it if you can. 

—Chorus of Dragoons, 
in Patience 

by Gilbert and Sullivan 


Our strategy in the double-slit experiment is to send electrons through a double-slit di¬ 
aphragm and see how the intensity measured by the detector differs from the interference 
pattern formed by light. To implement this strategy, we must make a few modifications 
in the apparatus Young used when he performed this experiment with light. 

First we replace the light source with an electron gun —a device that produces a 
(nearly monoenergetic) beam of electrons of energy E. A heated tungsten wire, for 
example, produces a stream of electrons that we can accelerate to the desired velocity. 
Second, we replace the photographic plate with an electron detector: a device that counts 
the number of electrons that arrive in each square meter of unit area per sec. (Like the 
photographic plate used in Young’s experiment, our electron detector measures the rate 
at which energy arrives at each point on the detector.) A screen covered with phosphor 
will do; when an electron arrives at the screen, it produces a spot. 

What would we expect to see at the detector if the electrons were particles, subject 
to the same physical laws as, say, marbles? Imagine for a moment that we block one 
slit—say, the lower slit in Fig. 2.3—so that all electrons must come through the other, 
open slit. Most electrons that make it through the diaphragm will go straight through 
this slit, “piling up” at the detector directly opposite it. We therefore expect to see a 
maximum in the measured intensity opposite the upper slit. But some particles will 
scatter from the edges of this slit, so we expect some amount of spread in the pattern. A 
reasonable guess for the intensity for a beam of particles passing through this apparatus 
with only the upper slit open is the curve /„(0) sketched in Fig. 2.6a. The curve Ii(9) 
should be obtained if only the lower slit is open. 

What should happen when both slits are open? Well, if the electrons are indeed 
particles, then the measured intensity should be simply I u ($) + I\(0). This rather feature¬ 
less curve is sketched in Fig. 2.6b. (Were you to scale the apparatus to macroscopic size 
and send through it a uniform beam of marbles—with, of course, a suitable detector— 
this is what you would see.) But what we actually see when we run the experiment with 
electrons is altogether different. 


Sec. 2.5 Double Trouble 31 





(b) 


Figure 2.6 (a). Intensity patterns formed by blocking one of the slits in the diaphragm 
in Fig. 2.3 and sending particles through the apparatus, (b). What we expect to get when 
both slits are open. 


The measured intensities in Fig. 2.7 clearly exhibit bands of alternating high and 
low intensity: an interference pattern, like the one formed by light (see Fig. 2.4). This 
observation seems to imply that the electrons are diffracted by the slits at the diaphragm 
and then interfere in the region between the diaphragm and the detector. We can even fit 
the measured intensity of the scattered electrons to the double-slit function /doubled) of 
Eq. (2.6) provided we assign to each electron (of mass m and energy E) a wavelength 


A 


h 


(2.9) 


But to a classical physicist, steeped in the idea that electrons are particles, Eq. (2.9) is 
nonsense! 



Figure 2.7 An electron interference 
pattern formed in a double-slit experiment. 
[From P. G. Merli, G. F. Missiroli, and 
G. Pozzi, Amer. Jour. Phys., 44, 306 
(1976). Used with permission.] 


Aside: The Real Double-Slit Experiment. The double-slit experiment is no mere 
thought experiment. For several years double-slit experiments with electrons have 
been performed in the laboratory. The first such experiment was reported in 1954 
by G. Mollenstedt and H. Duker, who observed an electron interference pattern in an 
apparatus analogous to a Fresnel biprism. 14 Nowadays double-slit experiments are 
usually performed with an electron microscope. 15 In a typical experiment of this 
kind, electrons with energies around 60keV— i.e., with a wavelength of roughly 


15 Their article appeared in Naturwiss., 42, 41 (1954). See also C. Jonsson, Zeitschrift fur Physik, 161, 
454 (1961); a translation of this article was published in Amer. Jour. Phys., 42, 4 (1974). 

15 See O. Donati, G. F. Missiroli, and G. Pozzi, Amer. Jour. Phys., 41, 639 (1973) and P. G. Merli, G. 
F. Missiroli, and G. Pozzi, op. cit., 44, 306 (1976). 


32 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 


0.05 A —are scattered by 0.5 p slits (Ip = 10 -6 m) that are separated by about 2.0 p. 
The distance from the diaphragm to the detector is typically about 10 6 times the slit 
separation s. The interference pattern shown in Fig. 2.7 was obtained in such an 
experiment. 


Maybe They’re Waves? 

At first, the results of the electron double-slit experiment seem consistent with the (de¬ 
viant) notion that electrons are waves, not particles. 16 But as we investigate further, we 
discover a problem with this hypothesis. 

Suppose we turn down the intensity of the incident electron beam so that very few 
electrons per second pass through the diaphragm. Were electrons waves, the interference 
pattern that forms at the detector after a few seconds would be very weak. As time 
passes and more and more electrons are scattered by the double-slit diaphragm, this 
pattern would intensify, ultimately looking like Fig. 2.7. But this isn’t what happens. 

Shortly after we switch on the electron gun, we see at the detector not a diffraction 
pattern, but spots —just what we’d expect to see were the electrons particles! If you 
think I’m making this up, look at the actual data in Fig. 2.8a. This result is incompatible 
with the notion that electrons are waves, since waves transport energy via non localized 
wave fronts, not concentrated lumps. 17 

Curiously, the spots in Fig. 2.8a show no particular pattern, neither interference as 
in Fig. 2.4, nor a double-hump, as in Fig. 2.6. It looks like the electrons are particles 
that arrive randomly at the diaphragm. 

But they aren’t. With the passage of time, the electrons begin to form the inter¬ 
ference pattern of Fig. 2.7. The photographs in Fig. 2.8(b) and (c) show this pattern 
forming, as if by magic. These pictures are eerie—it’s as though each electron knows 
precisely where it should go to contribute to the interference pattern. This gives rise to 
the question: If the electrons are particles, what guides them to just the right place on 
the detector? 

We can summarize our observations thusly: when each electron arrives at the detec¬ 
tor, its interaction with the material of the detector produces a spot, a spatially-localized 
point—behavior we associate with a classical particle. Yet, when a number of electrons 
propagate from the diaphragm to the detector, they somehow form the distinctive pat¬ 
tern in Fig. 2.7—behavior we associate with classical waves. Perhaps strangest of all, 
this pattern appears only after sufficient time has elapsed that a statistically significant 
number of electrons has arrived at the detector. 

’Tis a situation worthy of Gilbert and Sullivan. In the same apparatus we can 
see electrons behaving like waves or like particles, depending on how long we let the 
experiment run. The short-term behavior of the electrons is incompatible with the wave 
model, but their long-term behavior is incompatible with the particle model. So what 
are they? 


lc This idea is quite radical—a wealth of experimental evidence to the contrary exists. Early experiments 
on electrons, such as Thompson’s 1907 measurements of e/m , Millikan’s 1917 measurements of the electron 
charge e, and Rutherford’s 1911 scattering experiments, strongly support the model of the electron as a discrete, 
indivisible unit of electric charge—definitely not a wave. 

17 You can see similar behavior—spots at the detector—if you perform Young’s interference experiment 
(the double-slit experiment with light) at low enough intensity that only a few photons per second arrive at the 
photographic plate. 


Sec. 2.5 Double Trouble 33 





(C) 


(b) 


Figure 2.8 The genesis of an electron 
interference pattern in the double-slit 
experiment. Each figure shows the pattern 
formed at the detector at successive times. 
Note the seeming randomness of the pattern 
at short time intervals. [From P. G. Merli, 
G. F. Missiroli, and G. Pozzi, Amer. 

Jour. Phys 44, 306 (1976). Used with 
permission.] 


The Mystery Deepens 

Whatever theory we dream up to make sense of these observations must preserve the 
spatially-localized property of electrons and yet explain the pattern formed when many 
electrons arrive at the detector. Let’s try the hypothesis that an electron is a new kind of 
particle, one that somehow propagates according to wave dynamics. This hypothesis, at 
least, would let us explain the observed pattern as due to the interference of two electrons, 
one from the upper slit and one from the lower slit. To test this idea, we devise another 
variation on the double-slit experiment. 

If this model of the electron is correct, we should be able to get rid of the inter¬ 
ference pattern by turning the incident beam density so low that only one electron goes 
through the diaphragm at a time. (Such an experiment is technologically feasible using 
an electron microscope.) A single electron, after all, has nothing to interfere with. But 
the results of this experiment are not what we expect. Even at the lowest possible inci¬ 
dent density, an interference pattern forms. This behavior is totally beyond the power 
of a particle model to explain. Any such model implicitly assumes that the electron 


34 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 







has a trajectory, i.e., that each electron goes through one slit or the other. Yet, in this 
experiment each electron acts as though it were interfering with itself! 18 Such results 
force us to accept that in no sense can an electron be thought of as a classical particle 
or a classical wave. 

The double-slit experiment beautifully illustrates one of the central mysteries of 
quantum physics: the dual nature of microscopic entities. I believe that the difficulties 
many people have understanding the results of this experiment arise because we are 
hidebound by our classical training and intuition. We persist in trying to force electrons 
and photons to fit either the classical particle model or the classical wave model. It is 
perhaps unfortunate that electrons do behave like classical particles in some experiments 
and like waves in others, for this behavior can seduce us into thinking that there must 
be some way to retain one of these classical models. But there isn’t; neither model by 
itself is correct, for neither model conforms to the observed behavior of electrons. To 
explain the double-slit results, we need a wholly new theory: quantum mechanics. 19 

More Trouble with Trajectories 

In Chap 1, I argued that the very idea of ascribing a trajectory to a microscopic particle 
is rendered nonsensical by the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle—on the grounds that 
if we can’t know precisely a particle’s position and momentum at any time, then we 
cannot even define its trajectory. The implications of this argument are nothing if not 
far-reaching: it requires us to jettison the entire machinery of Newtonian physics! The 
double-slit experiment provides further insight into this problem by showing us how 
misleading is the idea that microscopic particles follow paths in geometrical space. 

If the incident electrons did follow paths through the diaphragm to the detector, 
then each would have to pass through either the upper slit or the lower slit. Yet, the 
results of the double-slit experiment imply that the electrons go through both slits, for 
an interference pattern forms at the detector even if the incident intensity is so low that 
electrons traverse the region from source to detector singly. But interference is understood 
(in classical physics) as arising from the superposition of two (or more) waves, and such 
an explanation is inconsistent with the notion that the electrons follow classical paths. 

Aside: Failed Attempts to TVick the Electrons. You may be wondering if the issue 
of whether trajectories can be ascribed to electrons could be settled by a variation on 
this experiment—one that would “trick” the electrons into revealing which slit they 
went through. Suppose, for example, that we put an electron detector immediately 
behind each slit. By seeing which detector registers, we could determine once and 
for all which slit each electron went through. 

This gambit works! If we carry out such an experiment, we find that one or 
the other device (not both) registers for each electron that arrives at the phosphor. 

But after many electrons have undergone the journey through the diaphragm, if we 
look for an interference pattern at the phosphor, we find instead that the measured 

18 Thcre are still more subtleties to the double-slit experiment. For a fascinating discussion of this 
experiment, see Volume III of The Feynman Lectures on Physics, by R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. 
Sands, (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1965). 

1 J Regrettably, in this book we won’t get quite far enough to work out the quantum mechanics of 
the double-slit experiment. It is, however, important to note that theory can fully explain the results of 
this experiment. The argument uses a method from the quantum theory of scattering called the eikonal 
approximation to describe the elastic scattering of electrons by the two slits and the formation of the observed 
interference pattern. If you’re interested in the details, see G. Anido and D. G. Miller’s article in the Amer. 
Jour of Phys., 52, 49 (1984). 


Sec. 2.5 Double Trouble 35 



intensity forms the “double hump” pattern characteristic of particles (see Fig. 2.6). 

So this experiment in no way explains the wave-like behavior of the propagation of 
electrons in the original apparatus, for in this experiment the behavior of the electrons 
is consistently particle-like. 

What went wrong was that we interfered. By measuring position immediately 
behind the diaphragm, we altered the state of the incident electrons, changing their 
subsequent behavior and therefore the pattern they formed on the phosphor. In partic¬ 
ular, our observation of which slit the electrons went through imparted momentum to 
them. This transfer of momentum destroyed the interference pattern. This experiment 
illustrates the interaction between the observer and the observed that we discussed 
in Chap. 1: a measurement on a microscopic system inevitably alters its state in an 
uncontrollable way. 

The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle affords some insight into this interaction. 

To be sure which slit the electrons pass through, we must measure position (just behind 
the diaphragm) accurately to within an uncertainty Ax that is less than the spacing 
between the slits. But since the uncertainty product AxAp x must be positive, a 
non-zero position uncertainty implies a non-zero momentum uncertainty. A detailed 
quantitative analysis along these lines reveals that the resulting A p x is just large 
enough to wash out the interference pattern at the detector. 20 

Duality characterizes all the whole panoply of quantum particles: protons, neutrons, 
atoms, molecules, etc. Invariable, microscopic entities seem to propagate according to 
wave dynamics but to interact with each other according to particle dynamics. 

An explanation of wave-particle duality was not to appear until the advent of the 
quantum mechanics of Schrodinger, Heisenberg, and other physicists that will come 
forward. But a significant step on the road to this theory was taken in 1923 by Prince 
Louis Victor Pierre Raymond de Broglie, whom we’ll meet in the next section. 




2.6 IT ALL STARTED WITH DE BROGLIE 

The experiments discussed in § 2.3-2.5 raise a host of questions. If electromagnetic radi¬ 
ation consists of photons—localized clumps of energy—how can we explain phenomena 
such as diffraction and interference? If not, then why did Compton have to use classical 
collision theory to explain the scattering of x rays by metals? On the other hand, if 
electrons are particles, why do they produce an interference pattern at the detector in 
the double-slit experiment? The behavior of electrons and photons in these experiments 
seems provocatively similar—crazy, to be sure, but crazy in the same way. Are electrons 
and photons in some sense the same? 

Einstein was deeply puzzled by this question until he noticed a possible answer 
in the doctoral thesis of a young French physicist. In 1924, Einstein wrote in a letter 
to his Dutch colleague Hendrik Lorentz (1853-1928) that the research of Prince Louis 
de Broglie (1892-1975) “...is the first feeble ray of light to illuminate this, the worst 
of our physical riddles.” De Broglie’s achievement was to synthesize the wave-like 
and particle-like aspects of microscopic matter. Although de Broglie seems to have 
only dimly understood the nature of quantum particles, and his rather nebulous physical 
models of quanta have since been superseded, the importance of his contribution has not 
diminished. It initiated the development of modem quantum mechanics. 

20 For details, see J. S. Marsh, Amer. Jour. Phys., 43, 97 (1975). 


36 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 


Sometimes a Great Notion 

In 1910 de Broglie began studying history at the University of Paris; soon, however, 
he switched to physics. His studies were interrupted in 1913 by a six-year stint in the 
French army, during which he and his brother Maurice worked on wireless telegraphy. 
Then in 1919 he returned to Paris for his doctoral research. 

From work on the x-ray spectra of heavy elements, de Broglie knew of photons and 
the Bohr model of atomic structure. And he was particularly intrigued by “Planck’s mys¬ 
terious quanta.” So he set himself the task of “[uniting] the corpuscular and undulatory 
points of view and thus [penetrating] a bit into the real nature of quanta.” 

In 1923, lightning struck. As de Broglie tells it: 

As in my conversations with my brother we always arrived at the conclusion that in 
the case of x-rays one had [both] waves and corpuscles, thus suddenly—I cannot give 
the exact date when it happened, but it was certainly in the course of summer 1923—I 
got the idea that one had to extend this duality to the material particles, especially to 
electrons. 

Thus did de Broglie come up with the idea of matter waves. This idea led him to the 
important notion that all microscopic material particles are characterized by a wavelength 
and a frequency, just like photons. 

Aesthetic considerations seem to have influenced de Broglie’s thinking towards the 
idea of matter waves. He evidently felt that nature should be symmetrical, so if particles 
of light (photons) were to be associated with electromagnetic radiation, then so should 
waves of matter be associated with electrons. Simply stated, his hypothesis is this: There 
is associated with the motion of every material particle a “fictitious wave” that somehow 
guides the motion of its quantum of energy. 

In spite of its rather vague character, this idea was remarkably successful. For 
example, using the methods of classical optics (such as Fermat’s principle) to describe 
the propagation of quanta, de Broglie was able to explain how photons (and, for that 
matter, electrons) diffract and interfere: It is not the particles themselves but rather their 
“guide waves” that diffract and interfere. In de Broglie’s words, “the fundamental bond 
which unites the two great principles of geometrical optics and of dynamics is thus fully 
brought to light.” 

De Broglie proffered these ideas in his Ph.D. dissertation, which he wrote at age 
31. His thesis did not fully convince his examiners, who were impressed but skeptical 
of the physical reality of de Broglie’s matter waves. One examiner later wrote, “at the 
time of the defense of the thesis, I did not believe in the physical reality of the waves 
associated with the particles of matter. Rather, I regarded them as very interesting objects 
of imagination.” 21 Nevertheless, de Broglie passed. 

Beautiful Equations 

De Broglie’s equations for the wavelength and frequency of his matter waves are elegant 
and simple. Even their derivations are not complicated. 22 In his seminal paper of 1923, 

21 It is not clear that de Broglie himself knew what he meant by a matter wave. In his thesis he notes 
that "the definitions of the phase wave and of the periodic phenomenon were purposely left somewhat vague.” 
In subsequent papers, de Broglie tried several different interpretations of his elusive waves. (For a thorough 
discussion of these interpretations, see Chap. V of The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, Volume I, 
Part 2 by J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg (New York: Springer-Verlag 1982).] 

22 See Cropper, op. cit., pp. 57-63. 


Sec. 2.6 It All Started with de Broglie 37 



de Broglie began with light quanta —photons—so I’ll first recap the derivation of the 
equation relating the wavelength and momentum of a photon and then press on to material 
particles. 

The photon is a relativistic particle of rest mass mo = 0. Hence the momentum 
p of a photon is related to its total energy E through the speed of light c as 

E 

p = —. [for m 0 = 0] (2.10) 

c 

To introduce the frequency u of the photon, we use Einstein’s equation for the photon 
energy 


E = hv 


( 2 . 11 ) 


to write Eq. (2.10) as 



( 2 . 12 ) 


For a wave in free space, the wavelength is A = c/v , so Eq. (2.12) becomes 



(2.13) 


Now, in contrast to a photon, a material particle such as an electron has a non-zero 
rest mass m 0 . Therefore the relationship between the energy and momentum of such 
a particle moving at relativistic velocities (in a region of zero potential energy) is not 
Eq. (2.10), but rather 


E 2 = p 2 c 2 + mlc 4 . (2.14) 

If the velocity of the particle is non-relativistic (v < c), then its kinetic energy is simply 23 

p 2 

T = , (2.15a) 

Zm 0 


where T is the kinetic energy, 24 


23 The notational conventions of physics dictate a confusing ambiguity between Eqs. (2.14) and (2.15), 
because the rest mass energy moc 2 is included in E in (2.14) but not in (2.15). The relativistic kinetic energy, 
which is sometimes denoted by the symbol I<, is defined as 


K = \J p 2 C 2 + »}qC 4 — 7/J0C 2 . 

It is this quantity which, in the non-relativistic limit, reduces to Eq. (2.l5n). [See Classical Mechanics, 2nd ed. 
by Herbert Goldstein (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wcsley, 1983, pp. 307-309).] I’ll adhere to standard practice 
by using E for the energy in the relativistic and non-relativistic cases. 

24 This equation is usually written with the symbol E standing for the kinetic energy, as 

E= A 
2/no 

I’ll follow this convention in this book whenever dealing with non-relativistic particles (i.e., most of the time). 


38 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



I 


T = E-m 0 c 2 . 


(2.15/?) 


In either case, the derivation of Eq. (2.13) cannot be applied to a material particle. 

Nonetheless, de Broglie proposed that Eqs. (2.11) and (2.13) be used for material 
particles as well as photons. 25 Thus,/*?/* electrons, atoms, photons and all other quantum 
particles, the energy and momentum are related to the frequency and wavelength by 


p = h/X 
E = hu 


de Broglie-Einstein equations 


(2.16) 


Notice that the de Broglie equation A = h/p implies an inverse relationship 
between the total energy E of a particle and its wavelength, viz.. 



(2.17) 


If applied to a photon (by setting the rest mass to zero), this equation reduces to Eq. (2.10). 
Hence the larger the energy of a particle, the smaller is its wavelength, and vice versa. 


Question 2-1 


Derive a relationship between the wavelength of an electron and its kinetic energy T. Prove 
that in the non-relativistic limit, your result reduces, as it should, to 


A = 


h 

P 


h 

m 0 v' 


The Unanswered Question 

De Broglie’s notion that some sort of wave guides the motion of every quantum enabled 
him to explain a variety of hitherto inexplicable phenomena, such as quantization of 
the orbital angular momentum of an electron in a Bohr orbit of the hydrogen atom. It 
also led him to suggest that the existence of matter waves could be verified by looking 
for electron diffraction patterns. Sure enough, in a series of experiments carried out in 
the years after 1923, such patterns were found. Electrons were diffracting all over the 
place: at non-relativistic velocities, in the classic experiments of C. J. Davisson and L. 
H. Germer (which were later repeated more accurately by G. P. Thompson 26 ), and at 
relativistic velocities, in experiments by J. V. Hughes and others. 27 These successes 
vindicated de Broglie’s ideas. Matter waves were real. 

But de Broglie’s research left unanswered deep and important questions: what is a 
matter wave? Of what is A the wavelength? How do these mysterious waves control the 

25 De Broglie based his argument on the special theory of relativity. First, he equated the rest en¬ 
ergy moc 2 of a material quantum to the energy hu 0 of its “periodic internal motion,” where uq is the 
“intrinsic frequ ency” of the particle. Next, he considered a quantum moving at velocity v with momentum 

P = rn 0 vf \J 1 — (u/ c ) 2 and used relativistic kinematics to show that the frequency and wavelength of such 
a particle are given by Eq. (2.16). 

2G Amer. Jour. Phys., 29, 821 (1961). 

27 A complete list of references can be found in the article “De Broglie’s Relativistic Phase Waves and 
Wave Groups” by H. R. Brown and R. de A. Martins, Amer. Jour. Phys., 52, 1130 (1984). 


Sec. 2.6 It All Started with de Broglie 39 




propagation of a microscopic particle? The answers are not to be found in de Broglie’s 
writings. 28 

Nonetheless, by raising such questions and focusing the attention of the physics 
community on the need to associate some sort of wave with microscopic material parti¬ 
cles, de Broglie initiated the quest for a new physical theory. This quest led physicists 
on a torturous path during the early twenties, which the French physicist Oliver Costa 
de Beauregard has called the Stone Age of Quantum Mechanics (Era Paleoquantique). 
But rather than follow this path, we shall jump in Part II to the end of the story, the 
successful theory of Erwin Schrodinger, Werner Heisenberg, and the other fathers of 
modern quantum mechanics. 


2.7 THE CONTROVERSIAL CONCEPT OF COMPLIMENTARY 

As for knowledge, it’s the scandal of our age 
that philosophy has been whittled away to 
a barebones epistomology, and thence to 
an even barer agnoiology. 

Have I found a word you don’t know, Louis? 
Agnoiology is the philosophy of ignorance, 
a philosophy for philosophers. 

—from Camp Concentration 
by Thomas M. Disch 


To explain the behavior of quantum particles, we evidently must use both the classical 
wave and particle models—in spite of the apparent contradictions between them. To say 
that this situation poses logical problems is to understate wildly. In the early twenties, 
this predicament lay heavy on the minds of physicists, until the Danish physicist Niels 
Henrik David Bohr (1885-1962) proposed a way out. 

Bohr to the Rescue 

Bohr was one of the intellectual giants of early quantum theory. His ideas and his per¬ 
sonality were enormously influential. During the twenties and thirties, the Bohr Institute 
in Copenhagen (which was financially supported by the Carlsberg Brewery) became a 
haven for scientists who were developing the new physics. 

Bohr was not always receptive to quantum ideas; like many of his colleagues, 
he initially rejected Einstein’s photons. But by 1925 the overwhelming experimental 
evidence that light actually has a dual nature had convinced him. So for the next 
several years, Bohr concentrated on the logical problem implied by this duality, which 
he considered the central mystery of the interpretation of quantum theory. 

Unlike many of his colleagues, Bohr emphasized the mathematical formalism of 
quantum mechanics. Like de Broglie, he considered it vital to reconcile the apparently 
contradictory aspects of quanta. Bohr’s uneasy marriage of the wave and particle models 
was the Principle of Complimentarity. This principle entails two related ideas: 


28 If you are curious about de Broglie’s views, you may want to read excerpts from his thesis. You’ll 
find some selections in the anthology Wave Mechanics, edited by G. Ludwig (New York: Pergamon, 1968). 
More accessible is his Nobel Prize lecture, which you can find in The World of the Atom, edited by H. A. 
Boorse and L. Motz (New York: Basic Books, 1963). But beware: de Broglie’s works do not make light 
reading. 


40 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



1. A complete description of the observed behavior of microscopic particles requires 

concepts and properties that are mutually exclusive. 

2. The mutually exclusive aspects of quanta do not reveal themselves in the same 

observations. 

The second point was Bohr’s answer to the apparent paradox of wave-particle 
duality: There is no paradox. In a given observation, either quanta behave like waves 
or like particles. 

How, you may wonder, could Bohr get away with this—eliminating a paradox by 
claiming that it does not exist because it cannot be observed? Well, he has slipped through 
a logical loophole provided by the limitation of quantum physics that we mentioned in 
Chap. 1: quantum mechanics describes only observed phenomena. From this vantage 
point, the central question of wave-particle duality is not “can a thing be both a wave 
and a particle?” Rather, the question is “can a thing be observed behaving like a wave 
and a particle in the same measurement?” Bohr’s answer is no: in a given observation, 
quantum particles exhibit either wave-like behavior (if we observe their propagation) or 
particle-like behavior (if we observe their interaction with matter). And, sure enough, 
no one has yet found an exception to this principle. 

Notice that by restricting ourselves to observed phenomena, we are dodging the 
question, “what is the nature of the reality behind the phenomena?” Many quantum 
physicists answer, “there is no reality behind phenomena.” But that is another story. 29 

Complimentary Observables 

Before leaving complimentarity, I want to mention another aspect of this topic, one that 
relates it to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. 30 This principle implies a special 
relationship between position and momentum. The uncertainties in these observables are 
related by Ax A p > h/2 so if we obtain (via measurement) precise knowledge of either 
observable, we do so at the expense of any knowledge of the other. Bohr considered this 
mutual uncertainty as a manifestation of complimentarity in the mathematical fonnalism 
of quantum mechanics. 

The relationship between position and momentum, as expressed in the Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle, differs from the complimentary relationship of the wave and parti¬ 
cle nature of quanta: position and momentum are both particle-like attributes of quanta. 
Rather than describe position and momentum as complimentary, perhaps it would be 
better to describe them as incompatible. 

A Philosophical Cop-Out? 

The Principle of Complimentarity may seem a little vague. Indeed, that is how it struck 
the audience of distinguished physicists at the international conference in 1927 where 
Bohr first presented his ideas. These ideas are undeniably subtle, and Bohr did not 
always express himself clearly. Nevertheless, in spite of some initial confusion, the 
physicists developing and using quantum theory adopted complimentarity, and today it 

29 Anyone even mildly interested in such questions should go out now and buy a copy of Nick Herbert’s 
superb book Quantum Reality: Behind the New Physics (New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1985). 

30 This dimension of complimentarity was first articulated by Bohr and more fully developed by Wolf¬ 
gang Pauli (1900-1958). Pauli, whom we’ll meet again, was in a sense the progenitor of this book; he wrote 
the first quantum mechanics text. 

Sec. 2.7 The Controversial Concept of Complimentarity 41 



is one of the central tenets of the Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. 
(In Part II, we shall discuss this interpretation in detail.) The Copenhagen interpretation 
has its detractors, but it is a way of making sense (more or less) of the physics of the 
microworld, and it remains the dominant interpretation of quantum mechanics. 

In spite of the wide adoption of the Principle of Complimentarity, many thinkers 
have found it philosophically offensive, perhaps because rather than confront the prob¬ 
lem of duality head on, Bohr’s principle seems to sneak around it, taking recourse in 
the limitation of quantum mechanics to observed phenomena. James R. Newman has 
expressed the uneasiness some feel with complimentarity: 

In this century the professional philosophers have let the physicists get away with 
murder. It is a safe bet that no other group of scientists could have passed off and 
gained acceptance for such an extraordinary principle as complimentarity. 

2.8 FINAL THOUGHTS: A FEW WORDS ABOUT WORDS 

I suspect that some of the difficulties people have with complimentarity stem from clas¬ 
sical thinking, from their understandable determination to cling to classical models. But 
after all, the wave and particle descriptions of nature are merely models. There is no 
reason to expect them to apply to the whole physical world. The results we have seen 
in this chapter tell us that in the microworld, each of these models is part of the truth , 
but each by itself is incomplete. In some cases, the wave model must be invoked to 
understand observations; in others, the particle model. 

Electrons aren’t particles. They aren’t waves, either. They are something else, for 
which we neither have a name nor a classical model. Properly, we should follow de 
Broglie’s lead and refer to them as “fragments of energy,” but that would be awkward. 
Or we could follow Eddington and call them “wavicles,” but that sounds silly. So we 
stick with “particles” (leaving off the quotation marks) and do the best we can. 

But we mustn’t overlook the influence of the language we use on how we think. 
In the microworld, nature transcends our familiar language and the technical language 
of the classical physicist. On this point, Werner Heisenberg wrote: 

The problems of language here are really serious. We wish to speak in some way about 
the structure of atoms ... But we cannot speak about atoms in ordinary language. 

So be careful. Beginning in the next chapter we shall buckle down and take a 
serious look at the mathematical and physical structure of quantum mechanics, leaving 
behind for the moment purely qualitative concerns. But tread warily, lest you slip back 
into the black abyss of classical thinking and consequent confusion. With this caveat 
out of the way, we can proceed. 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 
The Beginnings 

The saga of the development of modern physics during the “Quantum Stone Age” makes 
fascinating reading. You can get a glimpse of this history in a modem physics book, 
such as 


42 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



1. Wehr, R., J. A. Richards, Jr., and T. W. Adair III, Physics of the Atom , 3rd ed. (Reading, 
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1978). 

2. Tipler, P. A., Modern Physics (New York: Worth, 1978). 

3. Eisberg, R., and R. Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and 
Particles , 2nd ed. (New York: Wiley, 1974). 

But there is more to this topic than these introductory surveys let on. You can learn 
about the key experiments that led the way in this quest in the original papers collected in 

4. Boorse, H. A., and L. Motz, eds., The World of the Atom (New York: Basic Books, 1963), 
or in texts such as 

5. Melissinos, A., Experiments in Modern Physics (New York: Academic Press, 1969). 
Lively accounts of several of these experiments have been published in the five 

volumes of 

6. Maglich, B., ed.. Adventures in Experimental Physics (Princeton, N.J.: World Science Edu¬ 
cation, 1972). 

Of the many delightful popular accounts of the development of modern physics, 
several of which are mentioned in the Selected Reading list for Chap. 1, I particularly 
like the treatment of history in 

7. Gamow, George, Thirty Years that Shook Physics (New York: Dover, 1985). 

One of the most imaginative treatments of this period is 

8. McConnmach, Russell, Night Thoughts of a Classical Physicist (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1982). This book (which is available in paperback) is a fictional account 
of the impact on an (imaginary) classical physicist of the coming of modern physics. It is 
superb. 

You should certainly read some of the writings of the masters, the men who devel¬ 
oped modern physics. A good selection of these can be found in the huge anthology (4). 
If you only read one author on this history, I would recommend Werner Heisenberg, who 
was a superb writer as well as a brilliant physicist. Heisenberg’s essays are readable, 
entertaining, and informative. They are available in three (paperback) volumes 

9. Heisenberg, W., Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science (New York: 
Harper & Brothers, 1958). 

10. Heisenberg, W., Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1971). 

11. Heisenberg, W., Across the Frontiers (New York: Harper & Row, 1974). 

Want more? There are some excellent single-volume historical treatments available. 
One that you will find recommended throughout this book (and that is available in 
paperback) is 

12. Cropper, William, H., The Quantum Physicists and an Introduction to their Physics (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1970). 

Also recommended for its insight and anecdotes is 

13. Segre, E., From X-Rays to Quarks: Modern Physicists and Their Discoveries (San Francisco: 
W. H. Freeman & Co., 1980). 

For its care and thoroughness, I highly recommend 

14. Jammer, M., The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1966). 

Finally, for sheer completeness you can’t beat the massive set 

15. Mehra, J., and H. Rechenberg, The Historical Development of Quantum Theory (New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1982). 


Annotated Selected Readings 43 



About Waves 


Sections 2.3 and 2.4 contain rather cursory reviews of the irreducible minimum you need 
to know about wave phenomena. Several good texts on waves have been written, and 
you’ll find reference to many of them in later chapters. For reviews of diffraction and 
interference (beyond those provided here), try 

16. Giancoli, D., Physics (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1984). A nice (and short) 
introductory treatment. 

17. French, A. P., Vibrations and Waves (New York: W. W. Norton, 1971). (Introductory level, 
but far more detailed than you’d find in a freshman physics text like Giancoli’s.) 

18. Elmore, W. C., and Mark A. Heald, The Physics of Waves (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979), 
Chap. 10. (Advanced). 

Duality Explored 

An excellent, detailed history of the development of wave-particle duality is given in 

19. Wheaton, B. R., The Tiger and the Shark: Empirical Roots of Wave-Particle Dualism (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1983). This book is especially noteworthy for its treat¬ 
ment of the interface between theory and experiment during this period. 

To find out what is going on today in duality research (yes, there is such research), 
dig into 

20. Diner, S., S. Fargue, G. Lochak, and F. Selleri, eds., The Wave-Particle Dualism: A Tribute 
to Louis de Broglie on his 90th Birthday (Boston: D. Reidel, 1984). 

EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


1 hear and I forget. 

I see and I remember. 

I do and I understand. 

—Confucius 

In these exercises and problems we confront the conceptual nature of quantum 
physics in a variety of situations, ranging from actual experiments to thought experiments 
to the real world. None of these problems requires much algebra or extensive calculations, 
but several will demand careful thought. (Some of these problems are review exercises. 
To solve them you may need to refresh your memory from one of the modern physics 
texts recommended in this chapter’s Selected Readings list.) 

Exercises 

2.1 Wave-Particle Duality in Action. 

Two kinds of microscopes are currently used in research: electron microscopes and light 
microscopes. Both exploit the wave nature of microscopic particles—electrons in the former 
apparatus, photons in the latter. 

The limit of the resolving power of a microscope is the smallest distance separating two 
points in space that can be distinguished under ideal conditions. This quantity is roughly 
equal to the wavelength of the particles used in the microscope. Hence the resolving power 
is a measure of the uncertainty in the position of an observed object. 

(a) Consider a light microscope in which 4eV photons illuminate an object. Calculate the 
momentum of such a photon (in MKS units). 

44 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



(b) Evaluate the minimum uncertainty in the position of a subatomic particle being observed 
with 4 eV photons. 

(c) Repeat parts (a) and (b) for an electron microscope that uses 4 eV electrons. 

(d) Suppose the position of a particle is determined with the light microscope of parts (a) 
and (b). What is the corresponding uncertainty in the momentum of the observed particle 
after the position measurement? 

(e) Suppose the position of a particle is measured with the electron microscope of part (c). 
What is the uncertainty in the momentum of the observed particle after the measurement? 

(f) What advantages do electron microscopes have over light microscopes? 

2.2 Macroscopic Physics or Microscopic Physics? 

(a) Consider a particle of mass lg that is moving at a speed v = 10 m sec -1 . To study the 
physics of this particle, do we need to consider its wave nature? Justify your answer 
with a simple calculation and a brief explanation of the significance of the result. 

(b) Here is a table of the diameters and ionization potentials of several atoms: 


Atom 

Diameter (A) 

Ionization Potential (eV) 

He 

1.16 

24.6 

Ne 

1.36 

21.6 

Ar 

2.64 

15.7 


An important experimental technique for studying some of the properties of an atom is to 
ionize the valence electron , causing it to be ejected from the atom so that its properties can 
be studied. 31 In such an experiment do we need to consider the wave nature of the electron? 
As in part (a), be sure to justify your answer. 

Problems 

2.1 Black-Body Radiation. 

One of the early advances in the study of black-body radiation was the Stefan-Boltzmann 
law. This law is a simple formula for the power radiated from the surface of a black body. 
It expresses the radiated power P per unit surface area in terms of the temperature as 

P = oT\ 

where T is the temperature in degrees Kelvin of the black-body radiator and a is the Stefan- 
Boltzmann constant, 

a = 5.67 x 10 -8 W-m -2 -K -4 . 

In astrophysics, the upper atmospheres of stars are sometimes considered to be black-body 
radiators. Using such a model and the Stefan-Boltzmann law, estimate the atmospheric 
temperature of the sun. 

Hint: For the incident radiant solar flux arriving at the earth’s outer atmosphere use the value 
1.4 x 10 3 J-m -2 -sec -1 . The diameter of the sun is about 1.4 x 10 9 m, and the average radius 
of the earth’s orbit is 1 astronomical unit—about 1.5 x 10 11 m. 

2.2 The Ultraviolet Catastrophe. 

Another early advance in understanding the physics of black-body radiation was the derivation 
by Rayleigh and Jeans of a formula for the radiation density function p. These physicists used 

31 The valence electron is the least tightly bound electron in the atom. It is bound by an amount equal 
to the ionization potential of the atom. For example, it takes 24.6 eV to ionize a He atom. 


Exercises and Problems 45 



classical arguments to obtain this quantity as a function of the wavelength A of the radiation 
and the temperature T of the cavity. 32 They obtained 


P(A,T) 


S-nk n T 

A 4 


where ks is the Boltzmann constant. 

(a) From Planck’s radiation formula (2.2) derive an expression for p(A,T). 

Hint: Remember that the total energy density— i.e., including all frequencies—must be 
the same whether u or A is used as the independent variable. 

(b) Compare the Rayleigh-Jeans radiation formula given above with Planck’s result as ex¬ 
pressed in (a). Are the two in agreement for any ranges of A and T? If so, determine 
quantitatively where the two expressions agree. 

(c) Using Planck’s result for p(A,T) show that the total energy density is proportional to 
T 4 . 

(d) Derive the total energy density from the Rayleigh-Jeans formula. Why was this result 
called the ultraviolet catastrophe ? 

2.3 An Actual Case of Electron Interference. 

A double-slit experiment with electrons like the one discussed in § 2.5 was reported in 1961 
by Claus Jonsson. 33 The apparatus he used is quite similar to that shown in Fig. 2.3. In this 
apparatus, two slits of width w = O.bp (where 1 p = 10 -G m) are cut in a diaphragm made 
of copper foil. These slits were separated by s = 2 p. Jonsson accelerated electrons toward 
this diaphragm through a potential difference of 50 kV. The distance from the diaphragm to 
the detector was D = 35 cm. 

(a) Let p denote the momentum of the electrons. Derive an expression for the fringe spacing, 
i.e., the separation between adjacent maxima in the pattern of interference fringes that 
forms at the detector. (Express your answer in terms of p, D, s, and fundamental 
constants. Depending on how you approach this problem, you may need to read § 2.4). 

(b) From the wavelength of the electrons in this experiment evaluate the fringe spacing. 

(c) In the design of Jonsson’s experiment, it was necessary to include some electrostatic 
lenses between the double-slit diaphragm and the detector. These lenses are shown 
schematically in Fig. 2.3.1. From your answer to part (b), explain why these lenses are 
necessary. 

(d) Suppose we want to perfonn this experiment with visible light rather than with electrons. 
To obtain interference with photons in Jonsson’s apparatus, we must scale its dimensions 
accordingly— i.e., we must multiply each of the dimensions given above by the ratio of 
the wavelength of a visible photon to that of an electron. Calculate values of s, w, D, 
and the fringe spacing for such an experiment. Would it be practical to perform this 
experiment with photons? Why or why not? 

2.4 Evaluating de Broglie Wavelengths. 

(a) The de Broglie wavelength of a particle is an important parameter in the design of 
experiments based on phenomena such as particle diffraction. To see why, first evaluate 
the de Broglie wavelengths of 

(1) a 144 eV electron; 

(2) a 1 eV electron; 

(3) a 1 eV proton; 

(4) a 1 eV alpha particle. 

32 A recap of their derivation can be found in Fundamentals of Modern Physics by R. M. Eisberg (New 
York: Wiley, 1967), pp. 51-57. 

33 Zeitschrift fiir Physik. 161 , 454 ( 1961 ). 


46 


Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



Circular 

aperture 


I Reducing 
| stages 

Foil with slit 
Frauenhoffer lenses 

Electrostatic 

lenses 

- Phosphorescent screen 
“ Photographic plate 


Figure 2.3.1 Arrangement of lenses used 
in the double-slit experiment with electrons. 


Now, decide which of these particles would be most suitable for use in a crystal diffrac¬ 
tion experiment in which the crystal spacing is typical— i.e., on the order of 1.0 A. 

Explain your answer. 

(b) Neutron-crystal diffraction experiments are typically carried out using neutrons of energy 
« 50 meV. Why? 

(c) An important class of high-energy physics experiments entails accelerating protons to an 
energy large enough that their wavelength is 0.5fermi. What is the energy of such a 
proton? 

Hint: You cannot use the same equations to do parts (b) and (c) of this problem. 

(d) In this problem, we have considered situations in which we could base our calculation 
of the de Broglie wavelength on the non-relativistic energy-momentum relation 



and situations in which we had to use the relativistic relation 

E 2 = p 2 c 2 + TOqC 4 , (2.4.2) 

where m 0 is the rest mass of the particle in question. The justification for using (2.4.1) 
when appropriate is that this equation is the non-relativistic limit of (2.4.2). Of course, 
using (2.4.1) introduces some error into the resulting wavelength, but for non-relativistic 
velocities this error is negligible. Suppose, for example, we are willing to accept a 5% 
error in the de Broglie wavelength of a particle. Determine the minimum energy for 
which Eq. (2.4.1) will lead to a wavelength of this accuracy for 

(1) an electron; 

(2) a proton. 

2.5 Diffraction in Everyday Life. 

In each of the following tragic circumstances, determine whether or not particle diffraction 
will occur. Justify your answer in each case with a quantitative result and a qualitative 
argument. 

(a) A 1986 Mercedez-Benz, of mass 4000 kg travelling at 200 mph, slams into a garage; 

(b) A stone of mass 10 g hurtles at 10 m/sec into a 0.3 m window; 

(c) A grain of pollen of diameter 10~ 5 cm enters a 1.0cm nostril. 


Exercises and Problems 47 




Hint: A reasonable density for a pollen grain is 2gm/cm 3 . Assume that the pollen is at 
room temperature (27° C) and that its translational energy is equal to the thermal energy 
of the air molecules in the room. 

2.6 Quantization and the Correspondence Principle. 

In § 2.2 we saw Max Planck astound the world of physics by proclaiming that microscopic 
oscillators in a black body can have only discrete energies 

E n = nhv, (2.6.1) 

where u is the frequency of the oscillator and ft = 6.626 x 10 -34 J-sec. Yet we know 
that macroscopic oscillators have continuous energies. In this problem we shall explore this 
apparent contradiction and show that it isn’t a contradiction at all. 

(a) Consider the following macroscopic oscillator: two masses m = 1 g are attached 

to a spring and oscillate with amplitude A = 1.0 cm at frequency v = 100 Hz. 
Use classical physics to calculate the energy of the oscillator, expressing your result in 
joules, ergs, and in electron volts (eV). Now, using Planck’s relation (2.6.1), calculate 
the corresponding value of n. 

(b) From your answer to (a), calculate the percentage change in energy that results from 
unit change in n. Could you measure such a change? 

(c) The H 2 molecule is a microscopic oscillator. The mass of each hydrogen atom is 
roughly 1.7 x 10 _24 g. The frequency of oscillation of the two atoms in H 2 is u « 
1.0 x 10 14 sec -1 . From this data, calculate the energy of this oscillator (in electron 
volts) for n = 1, 2, and 3. 

(d) Using classical physics, calculate numerical values (in A) for the amplitude of the three 
states considered in (c). We see that the amplitude of a microscopic oscillator is quantized. 

2.7 An Equation for de Broglie’s Matter Waves. 

In § 2.6, we discussed the hypothesis of the irrepressible Prince Louis de Broglie, who in 
his Ph. D. thesis maintained that all matter has wave-like properties—so that, for example, 
material particles should display diffraction phenomena when they interact with objects whose 
size is of the order of the particle’s wavelength. In this problem, we use the de Broglie and 
Einstein relations (2.16) to derive a “wave equation” for a particle moving through space in 
the absence of any forces— i.e., a free particle. 

NOTE: It is convenient in this problem to write these relations in terms of the 
angular frequency u = 2nu and the wave vector k = 2ir/\, to wit: 

E = hu = ha> 
p = h/X = hk y 

where ft = h/{2it). 

(a) Write down an expression in exponential form for a traveling wave ^(x, t) propagating 
in the +x direction. Use A for the amplitude of the wave, A for its wavelength, and v 
for its frequency. We shall suppose that this wave “represents” (in some sense) a free 
particle of mass m. 

(b) Rewrite your wave function ^(x, t) in terms of the particle’s momentum p and its energy 

E. 

At this point we ask the obvious question: what sort of equation does ^(Xjt) satisfy— i.e., 
what is the “wave equation” for a free particle? From our experience with waves in classical 
physics, we expect this to be a differential equation in x and t. The general form of such an 
equation is 

d T d 2 T , d T , d 2 T 

«°+a,—^+ a2 —4- + -" - 6,—4- + i, 2 _4. + ... 


48 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



We want to derive a general equation for the de Broglie wave, so we must impose a restriction 
on the coefficients a 0 , a lf ..., b it b 2 , ... . These quantities can involve fundamental constants 
(such as m, e, and h) but not quantities that depend on the wave (such as A and E). 

(c) Figure out the simplest such differential equation by imposing the requirement that your 
equation be consistent with the classical relationship between energy E and momentum 
p of a free particle, E = p 2 /(2m). You have just derived the Schrodinger equation for 
a free particle! 

(d) Argue from your answer to (c) that the wave function for a free particle must be a 
complex function of x and t. 

2.8 An Equation for de Broglie’s Matter Waves. 

In § 2.1 we briefly discussed quantization of energy. But energy is not the only observable of 
microscopic systems that is quantized. To the contrary: most observables of quantum systems 
exhibit quantization. In this problem we shall illustrate quantization of angular momentum 
in a thought experiment ( Gedanken-experiment ). This experiment also illustrates the subtle, 
beautiful interplay of the fundamental ideas of quantum physics: in this case, of duality and 
quantization. 

In Fig. 2.8.1 is shown a “quantum hamster cage.” (Assume that the “quantum hamster” 
is out frolicking, so that the cage is empty.) This miracle of rare device consists of two end 
discs connected by N equally-spaced pins, where N is very large. The cage is mounted on 
frictionless bearings about the indicated rotation axis so that it can turn freely. (The rotation 
axis is perpendicular to the paper in this figure.) Let a denote the radius of the cage.^s shown 
in the side view in this figure. 



Figure 2.8.1 The quantum hamster cage. [Adapted from Introduction to Quantum 
Mechanics by R. H. Dicke and J. P. Wiltke (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, I960).] 


Suppose a monochromatic light source projects a beam of photons radially outward from 
the rotation axis. The beam falls on a small portion of the circumference that, since N is 
large, includes many pins. 

(a) To a good approximation, the pins in this set-up constitute a plane-wave diffraction 
grating, so light from the source will be diffracted through various discrete angles. Let 
6 denote one of the angles of diffraction. Derive an expression for sin0 in terms of 
the photon wavelength A, N, a, and an integer n. Your answer is an expression, in the 
language of mathematics, of the wave-like characteristics of the photons in the beam. 

(b) Now let’s explore the particle-like characteristics of the photons. After a photon leaves 
the source, it moves radially outward. Consider such a photon with linear momentum p 
before it encounters the pins. Determine the angular momentum about the drum axis of 
the moving photon. Justify your answer. 

(c) Suppose the photon of part (b) is scattered by the pins through an angle 6. Determine 
the magnitude of the angular momentum of the photon after it is scattered. 


Exercises and Problems 49 


(d) Using conservation of angular momentum, the de Broglie relations (2.16) and your results 
from parts (a)—(c), show that the angular momentum of the drum is an integral multiple 
of Nh, where h = hj'lit. (Assume that the drum is initially at rest.) 

2.9 Pair Annihilation. 

Among Einstein’s epochal contributions to physics are the ideas of (1) the quantization of 
energy associated with electromagnetic radiation, as expressed by E = hv y and (2) the mass- 
energy equivalence expressed by E — me 2 . In this problem, we shall explore the connection 
between these ideas in a particularly interesting physical situation. 

The process of pair annihilation involves an electron and a positron. A positron is a 
particle with the same mass and magnitude of charge as the electron, but with the opposite 
sign of the charge—i.e., a positron is a positively-charged “anti-electron”. 3,1 In the annihilation 
process, an electron and a positron that are (essentially) at rest next to one another unite and 
are annihilated. The process entails complete conversion of mass energy to radiation energy. 

(a) Calculate the amount of energy that results from such a pair annihilation, expressing 
your result in joules, ergs, and eV. 

(b) In the most commonly observed annihilation event, two photons of equal energy are 
emitted. Explain physically why this result is expected. 

(c) Photons, as you know, have zero rest mass. We can, however, assign a “pseudomass’Vn to 
the photon provided we agree to use it only in equations for the momentum and relativistic 
self-energy. Consider a photon of energy hv. Derive an expression for m and for the 
momentum p in terms of the photon wavelength A and fundamental constants. Calculate 
values for rh and p for the photons in part (b). 


34 The positron was the first anti-particle discovered. It was discovered by C. D. Anderson in 1932; 
four years later, Anderson received half a Nobel Prize for his efforts. 


50 Chap. 2 Into the Microworld 



CHAPTER 3 

First Postulates 

The State Function and Its 
Interpretation 


3.1 Patterns of Propagating Possibility: Probability Waves 

3.2 Systems and States Thereof 
* 3.3 Probabilities: A Review 

3.4 The Gospel According to Born 

3.5 How to Normalize a State Function 

3.6 Great Expectations (and Uncertainties) 

3.7 Final Thoughts: What the State Function Isn't 



There was a moment’s silence while everybody thought. 
“I’ve got a sort of idea,” said Pooh at last, 

“but I don’t suppose it’s a very good one.” 

“I don’t suppose it is either,” said Eeyore. 

—The House at Pooh Corner 
by A. A. Milne 

Like classical physics, quantum physics need not be able to explain everything. But it 
should enable us to qualitatively and quantitatively explain and predict the properties 
and behavior of a reasonable variety of systems. In the microscopic realm, the systems 
we are interested in range in complexity from a particle moving through space in the 
absence of external forces to complex bound aggregates of particles, such as nuclei, 
atoms, molecules, and solids. And like macroscopic (classical) systems, microscopic 
(quantum) systems can exist in a variety of states ; each state is characterized by unique 
values for the physical properties of the system: energy, momentum, etc. 

In Part I we reviewed the way in which a classical state of a single macroscopic 
particle is defined by the particle’s trajectory (r(f), p (t)}. 1 We also argued that a state of 
a microscopic particle, such as an electron, cannot be represented by a trajectory, because 
according to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle we cannot specify simultaneous precise 
values of r(t) and p(£). Indeed, trajectories must not appear in a physical theory for the 
microscopic universe. In this chapter we’ll discover and explore the way in which we 
do represent a state in this universe. We’re going to meet the wave function. 

Our guide in this quest for a “state-descriptor” for the microverse is the wave- 
particle duality that characterizes the behavior of microscopic particles. In particular, in 
§ 3.1 we’ll search for clues in the results of the double-slit experiment of Chap. 2. Doing 
so will lead us to the wave function and to the first postulate of quantum mechanics, 
the topic of § 3.2. In reexamining data from the double-slit experiment we’ll also find a 
clue to the physical interpretation of the wave function. This interpretation is the essence 
of the second postulate of quantum mechanics, which we’ll formulate in § 3.4. Finally, 
in § 3.6 we’ll extend the probabilistic approach to two vital statistical quantities: the 
expectation value and the uncertainty. Discussing the uncertainty will bring us full circle 
to one of the key ideas we discussed in Chap. 2. 

I want to keep our discussion of these new ideas simple at first, so in this chapter 
we’ll consider states of a single particle at a fixed time. The time development of these 
states—according to the Schrodinger Equation—is the topic of Chap. 6. I also want to 
focus on a single physical property: position , because it’s comparatively easy to extract 
information about this property from a wave function. We’ll develop machinery for 
'studying other physical properties in Chap. 5. 

3.1 PATTERNS OF PROPAGATING POSSIBILITY: PROBABILITY 
WAVES 

Any theory of the physics of microscopic particles must be able to explain the weird 
behavior of electrons in the double-slit experiment. In § 2.5 we saw that en masse 

^ore precisely, the state of a system in classical mechanics is defined by a set of generalized coor¬ 
dinates and their canonical momenta. See Jerry B. Marion, Classical Dynamics of Particles and Systems, 2nd 
ed. (New York: Academic Press, 1970). 


52 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



electrons in this experiment create an interference pattern at the detector. Yet individual 
electrons arrive as localized “clumps” of energy. This dual nature must be built into any 
theory that purports to describe the microvvorld. But such a theory must also incorporate 
the limitation we discovered in Chap. 2: we cannot know which slit a particular electron 
passes through. In this section, we’ll reconsider the double-slit experiment and formulate 
a couple of hypotheses to explain its results. This voyage of discovery will lead us to a 
fundamental element of quantum physics: the wave function. 

Another Look at the Double-Slit Experiment with Light 

Let’s see if the Young interference experiment—the double-slit experiment with light 
(§ 2.4)—can give us a clue to the mystery of electron interference. According to the 
classical theory of electricity and magnetism, the interference pattern that forms when a 
(coherent) beam of light passes through the double-slit apparatus arises from the super¬ 
position of two electromagnetic waves, one diffracted from each slit. Let’s look a bit 

The detector in the Young experiment measures light intensity. This quantity is 

proportional to the squared magnitude of the electromagnetic field at the detector. 2 Let’s 
label the electric field vectors for each diffracted wave by a subscript that indicates which 
slit the wave passed through: E\{x) and E 2 (x). 3 In terms of these fields, the intensity 
1 1 2 (a;) for the case of both slits open is 

I 12 {x) oc \Ei(x) + E 2 (x) I 2 . (3.1fl) 

Now, when we expand the right hand side of (3.In), we find terms that involve 
products of the two electric fields: 

I l2 (x) <x |£!(x)| 2 + |£ 2 (z)| 2 + \E\(x)E 2 (x) + E^E^x)]. (3.16) 

The two terms in square brackets in Eq. (3.1 b) —the “cross terms”—are the mathemat¬ 
ical manifestations of the physical superposition of diffracted waves that produces the 
interference pattern. Of course, this explanation rests on the fact that Maxwell’s theory 
thoughtfully provides things to superpose, namely electromagnetic waves. 4 

2 In fact, the intensity at a point x on the detector is 

/ = e 0 c|£(.r)| 2 , 

where co is the permittivity of free space and c is the speed of light. 

3 For convenience, I will implement a very slight change of notation in this chapter from that in Chap. 2: 
to denote the slits I’ll use numbers rather than the more primitive “upper” and “lower” labels of § 2.5. Of 
course, you can number the slits any way you like; just be consistent. Similarly, we use I\ 2 rather than /double 
for the double-slit intensity. Finally, we use x, the distance along the detector in Fig. 2.3, rather than d as the 
independent variable. 

‘‘What allows us to add electromagnetic waves in this fashion and thereby obtain an intensity that 
explains the observed interference pattern in Young’s experiment is the linearity of the fundamental equations 
for electromagnetic fields, Maxwell’s equations. Similarly, the fundamental equation of quantum physics, the 
Schrodinger equation, turns out to be linear, and, as we’ll soon see, quantum waves must obey superposition. 
The connection between superposition of quantum waves and the linearity of the equation that we solve to 
determine these waves will be an important topic in Chap. 6. 


Sec. 3.1 Probability Waves 53 


Back to Electrons 


Now let’s return to the double-slit experiment with electrons and try to apply the principle 
we used to explain the results of Young’s experiment: superposition. Immediately, we 
run into a road-block. In classical mechanics we do not use waves to describe the states 
of particles. We use trajectories, and trajectories can’t be superposed and don’t interfere. 

Aside: Superposition According to de Broglie. As we saw in § 2.6, de Broglie 
dealt with this difficulty by introducing a concept not included in conventional clas¬ 
sical mechanics: the matter wave. His idea sounds good: we need something to 
superpose, and a matter wave is as good as any other. But it’s hard to see how to 
make de Broglie’s nebulous notion the basis of a workable physical theory. In fact, 
all straightforward efforts to associate a wave with an electron fail. For example, 
we might try to explain the behavior of the electrons by conjecturing that they actu¬ 
ally are classical waves. But the results of the double-slit experiment rule out this 
hypothesis: the pattern of dots seen at the detector after a short time clearly shows 
the particle-like qualities of electrons. More subtly, these results also preclude the 
hypothesis that electrons are classical particles somehow guided through space by a 
wave. Such an explanation assumes that electrons follow trajectories, and we know 
from Chap. 2 that trajectories are forbidden. Evidently, a more subtle idea is needed. 

Let’s return to the results of the double-slit experiment and see if they suggest an 
approach. It is useful to think about this experiment in terms of events. We can define an 
event in this experiment to be the arrival of an electron at the detector. If you’ll glance 
back at Fig. 2.8, you’ll see that the first several events in the double-slit experiment 
seem to be random— i.e., the locations of the spots formed by these arrivals appear to be 
random. Significantly, it is only after a large number of events that we see a well-defined 
pattern. Let’s see if we can incorporate this feature of the results into a hypothesis. 

One way to describe mathematically phenomena that are evident only after a large 
number of events have occurred is with probability theory. The results of the double-slit 
experiment suggest that we try thinking about the propagation of electrons using this 
approach. For example, we could ascribe to the electrons a probability of arriving at 
each location x on the detector. This conjecture, in turn, suggests that we associate with 
the electrons in the incident beam a “probability function.” The idea is that this function 
somehow contains information about the probability that an electron in the beam will 
wind up at each x after it passes through the diaphragm. According to this interpretation, 
the detector implicitly measures this probability function, for the information carried by 
this function is manifested in the measurement by the number of electrons that arrive at 
each x. 

The trick is to turn this vague idea into a hypothesis that is consistent with the 
experimental results. Here’s our first attempt at formulating such a hypothesis: interpret 
the electron intensity measured by the detector as a probability distribution ; />., 


Trial Hypothesis 1 

The motion of the electrons in the incident beam is governed by a probability distribution 
function that we’ll denote by Pi 2 (x,t). That is, at each time t this function is large at 
values of x where an electron is likely to be found and small at values of x where it is 
unlikely to be found. 


54 Chap. 3 First Postulates 





This formulation seems a step in the right direction; but does it work? Let’s put it 
to the test of experimental verification by devising a variation on the double-slit apparatus 
of § 2.8. Suppose we close a shutter on slit 2, thereby forcing all incident electrons to 
pass through slit 1. We observe that at the detector these electrons form a diffraction 
pattern like the one in Fig. 2.2a; the corresponding intensity is shown in Fig. 2.6a. Let’s 
denote the probability distribution function for detecting an electron at position x for this 
apparatus—with only slit 1 open—by t). Similarly, we’ll denote by P 2 (-'M) the 

probability function for electrons in an apparatus where slit 1 is closed and slit 2 is open. 
The intensity function for this case is also that of Fig. 2.6a. 

Now, if our trial hypothesis is correct, we should be able to relate the probability 
function for the apparatus in which both slits are open, P\ 2 {x, t), to the single-slit 
functions P\(x,t) and P 2 (x ) t). So let’s return to the two-slit case. If we conjecture that 
in this case each electron that reaches the detector went through either slit 1 or slit 2, 
then these probability distribution functions should be related by 5 

Pn(x t t) = Pi(x,t) + P 2 (z,f). (An Incorrect Equation) 

But the experimental data we studied in Chap. 2 tells us that this equation is wrong. 
To convince yourself, go back to Fig. 2.6. Compare the sum of the intensities shown 
there to the intensity for the interference pattern. Evidently, trial hypothesis # 1 won’t 
do the job. Can you figure out what’s wrong with it? 

Birth of a Notion 


The trouble with our first hypothesis is that it ignores the lesson of the Young interference 
experiment: to explain an interference pattern we need something to superpose. But we 
can’t superpose probability distributions; they don’t interfere with one another. But waves 
do. This suggests that at its most basic level, our theory must be formulated in terms of 
some sort of wave. 

So let’s devise an alternative trial hypothesis, one that makes the fundamental 
element of the theory a “probability wave.” This new wave will have all the attributes 
of a classical wave: a wavelength, frequency, amplitude, and so forth. I’ll denote it by 
the Greek symbol We know little about this function at present (!), so we’ll 

consider the most general case, and suppose that $ is complex . 6 

In our new hypothesis, it is the probability wave $/(x,t) that contains information 
about the likelihood of an electron being detected at position x at time t. In this new 
approach, the detector measures the “intensity” of our probability wave, i.e., the square 
of its magnitude. So the relationship between the wave and the probability distribution 
it describes is 7 


probability oc | wave 


(3.2) 


3 I have here used a result from probability theory: Since probabilities of mutually exclusive events add, 
the probability function for the two-slit experiment must be the sum of those for each single-slit experiment. 
If this result isn’t familiar, see the review of probability theory in § 3.3. 

°For a review of complex numbers and functions, see Appendix K. 

7 Equation (3.2) and its successors in this section arc written as proportionality relations rather than 
equalities because we arc here discussing relative rather than absolute probabilities. This distinction will be 
explained in § 3.3-3.5 when we investigate normalization. 


Sec. 3.1 Probability Waves 55 




So the idea is that the function $(z,£) is to be interpreted as a position probability 
amplitude. Here’s the new hypothesis: 


Trial Hypothesis 2 

The propagation of the electrons is governed by a probability wave t). At any time t, 
this function is the position probability amplitude for detection of the electron at position 
x. 


Does this hypothesis conform to observations? Let’s see. Consider first the appa¬ 
ratus with slit 2 closed and slit 1 open, and let denote the probability wave for 

electrons that reach the detector in this case. According to Eq. (3.2), the probability of an 
electron in such a state showing up at location x on the detector at time t is determined 
from the squared modulus of this function, viz. 8 

Pi(x } t) oc |$i(a;,£)| 2 . (3.3) 

In an apparatus with slit 1 closed and slit 2 open, the probability amplitude for electrons 
that reach the detector is ^ 2 (x } t) t an d the corresponding intensity is 

P 2 {x,t) oc |$ 2 (M)| 2 - (3.4) 

In the double-slit experiment, the functions $i (x,t) and define two possi¬ 

ble states of the electron, one corresponding to passage through slit 1, the other to slit 2. 
In this case, the appropriate probability wave is the superposition (aha!) of and \P 2 , 
/. e ., 9 

$12 (M) = $i(a, t) -I- $ 2 (M) • (3.5) 

Now this is important: the probability amplitude $ 12 {x, t) represents a superposition state 
that includes the two possibilities represented by 4' 1 (a:, t) and The measured 

intensity corresponds to the probability distribution, which according to (3.2) is the 
squared modulus of the intensity: 

Pi 2 (x,t) oc |$i 2 (a;,i)| 2 (3.6) 

= |$i(:M) + $2(M)| 2 - (3.7) 

The last step in verification of trial hypothesis # 2 is demonstrating that Eq. (3.7) 
predicts the observed interference pattern. To simplify the algebra involved in this 
demonstration, I want to write the functions $1 (x,t) and 4' 2 (a;,t) in terms of their 
magnitudes and phases. 10 If <*i(a;, t) and a 2 (x,t) denote the phases, we can write the 
probability amplitudes as 

= |4',(z,t)|e i0lW) (3.8a) 

8 Strictly speaking, I'J'ifx', t)\ 2 is a probability density function and must be multiplied by an infinites¬ 
imal volume element dx in one dimension to determine a probability. We’ll get to this subtle but important 
complication in due course (§ 3.4). 

°Nothing in the apparatus singles out one slit over the other. That is, it’s equally likely that an incident 
electron will go through slit 1 as through slit 2. That’s why I assigned equal weights to each single-slit 
amplitude in this equation. 

10 Any complex number 2 can be written as the product of a magnitude \z\ times a phase factor e ia 
(see Appendix K). Note carefully that in Eqs. (3.8) both magnitude and phase depend on x and t. 


56 Chap. 3 First Postulates 




and 


*i(x,t) = |\P 2 (a:, t)| (3.8ft) 

When we substitute (3.8) into (3.7), we obtain the probability function 

Pi 2 {x,t) <x |$i| 2 + l^l 2 + Itil |4'2l[e i< “‘‘ a2) + (3.9a) 

= |4'i| 2 + |4' 2 | 2 + 2|4'i|| 4'2| cos(aj -o 2 ). (3.9ft) 

Look at the third term on the right-hand side of (3 .9b): it’s an interference term! [Recall 
the crucial role played by the interference term in Eq. (3.1Z?) in our explanation of 
the results of Young’s experiment.] Depending on the phase difference ai — a 2 of 
the probability waves, this term produces constructive or destructive interference in the 
quantity measured at the detector. 

To read the physical significance of this mathematical result, we turn to our pro¬ 
posed interpretation of the probability function Pi 2 (a;,i). According to this interpre¬ 
tation, electrons congregate at values of x where constructive interference occurs (the 
high-intensity regions of the detector) and avoid places where destructive interference 
occurs (the low-intensity regions). These extremes (and the values inbetween) explain the 
observed interference patterns of the double-slit experiment. Evidently, trial hypothesis 
# 2 works! 

Look at what we’ve accomplished. Reasoning by analogy with the theory underly¬ 
ing the Young interference experiment and clinging tenaciously to the idea of affiliating 
some sort of “detection probability” with quantum particles, we have discovered the 
fundamental element of quantum theory: the wave function. That the predictions of our 
new theory agree with the results of the double-slit experiment is reason to turn this 
hypothesis into a formal postulate, which we’ll do in the next section. 


3.2 SYSTEMS AND STATES THEREOF 


Quantum physicists are interested in all sorts of physical systems—free protons, con¬ 
duction electrons in metals, atoms ranging from the simple (hydrogen) to the dauntingly 
complicated (uranium), molecules from H 2 to DNA. Each of these systems consists of 
one or more microscopic particles that may be interacting among themselves via inter¬ 
nal forces and may be exposed to external fields ( e.g ., electromagnetic or gravitational 
fields). Remarkably, states of these diverse systems are represented by the same type of 
vannints: state functions. 


Introducing the State Function 


Position probability amplitudes like the waves we used in § 3.1 to explain electron 
interference are the basic elements of quantum theory. In this theory each state of a 
system is represented by a different wave function. Actually, most quantum physicists 
are interested only in states that can be studied in a laboratory—such states are said to 
be physically realizable. The wave function also goes by the aliases state function and 


Sec. 3.2 Systems and States Thereof 57 



state vector. I’ll use capital Greek letters (see Appendix G) to symbolize wave functions 
and, in particular, will use ^ for a “generic wave function.” 11 

The stratagem of representing physical states by wave functions cannot be justified 
or proven. (But, as I suggested in § 3.1, its consequences can be verified experimentally.) 
This postulate is one of the foundations upon which quantum mechanical theory is 
constructed: 


The First Postulate of Quantum Mechanics 

Every physically-realizable state of a system is described in quantum mechanics by a state 
function # that contains all accessible physical information about the system in that state. 


Note the word “accessible” in Postulate I. The information we can extract from a 
wave function is limited, and there is no getting around these limitations. For example, 
the uncertainties that lurk like little land mines in quantum theory prohibit us in principle 
from knowing the precise values of position and momentum of a microscopic particle. 
We cannot obtain precise values of these properties in any way—not by experimental 
measurement, not by theoretical calculation. But all we can know about such a particle 
is buried in its wave functions. And it is only in this sense that the theory of quantum 
mechanics can be described as “complete.” 

State functions come in many guises; they can be written as functions of momen¬ 
tum, of energy, of position ... of any observable you wish. But, particularly in this 
book, you’ll usually see wave functions written as functions of the spatial coordinates 
of the particles that comprise the system and of the time, to wit: 



^ ^ (position, time) 


wave function 


Aside: States in Classical Physics. Notice how different this prescription for 
specifying a state is from the trajectories of Newtonian mechanics. In classical physics 
a particle’s spatial coordinates are functions of time. But, as we saw in Chap. 2, paths 
are not allowed in descriptions of quanta. Therefore, in quantum physics position and 
time are independent quantities. 


Throughout Parts II and III of this volume, we’ll consider several one-dimensional 
single-particle systems. For such a system, the position variable is x and the state function 
is simply 

V = V(x,t). (3.10) 


But we can trivially generalize this form to a single particle in three dimensions with 
position variable r, viz., 

« , = ®(r ,t), (3.11) 


or to a many-particle system, such as two particles in three dimensions, viz. 

V = ^(ri,r 2 ,i). 


(3.12) 


Such systems will come front-and-center in Volume II. 


11 In more general and abstract treatments of quantum mechanics, a state is represented by a vector 
in an infinite-dimensional linear vector space called a Hilbert space. You need not worry now about this 
generalization, but if you are interested see the Selected Readings for this chapter. 


58 Chap. 3 First Postulates 





Example 3.1. A Typical Wave Function 

One of the most important single-particle one-dimensional systems is the simple harmonic os¬ 
cillator: a particle of mass m moving in one dimension with potential 12 K(a;) = mut^x 2 /2. 
In Chap. 9 we’ll find that one of the physically-realizable state functions for the simple 
harmonic oscillator has the functional form 

V(x t t) = Ae- 02x2/2 ~ iEi/n . (3.13) 

Here A is the amplitude of the wave function, and E and (5 are constants related to various 
physical properties of the particle. (In particular, E is its total energy in the state represented 
by this wave function.) Notice that in general \I>(.t, f) is complex —it is real only at particular 
times, such as t = 0. This illustrates a property to which we’ll return shortly: all state 
functions are, in general, complex; they are real only at special times. The function in 
(3.13), along with a few other state functions we’ll meet in subsequent chapters, are on 
display in Fig. 3.1. 

Aside: Graphing State Functions. The complex nature of state functions poses 
some practical difficulties. For example, to graph a function such as (3.13) would 
require two three-dimensional graphs: one to show the real part of ^{x,t) as a 
function of x and t and one for the imaginary part. For this reason we usually look at 
“snapshots” of state functions—graphs in which time is “frozen” and we show only 
the dependence of \P(.t, f) on its spatial coordinate. 

In considering state functions such as those in Fig. 3.1, you must keep in mind 
that physically these functions are position probability amplitudes —that’s the idea we 
proposed in § 3.1 and that we’ll make formal in § 3.4. Hence the squared modulus of the 
state function, |^(a:,<)| 2 = will play a crucial role in digging physical 

infonnation out of this function. 13 

Look at Fig. 3.1 and try to envision the squared moduli of these functions. Notice 
that for each wave function you can find a (rather small) finite region of space where 
the probability of finding the particle is significantly larger than anywhere else. A state 
function that defines such a region of space is said to be spatially localized. Note this 
property well: Spatial localization is an extremely important property of state functions, 
for only functions that are spatially localized can represent quantum states. In § 3.5 I’ll 
show you how to translate this physical requirement into a mathematical constraint: the 

normalizability condition. 

/ 

The Principle of Superposition 

In § 3.1 I emphasized the crucial role of superposition in explaining the behavior of 
electrons (and photons) in the double-slit experiment. Indeed, we introduced waves in 
the first place so we would have things to superpose. The identification of wave functions 
with quantum states lends a profound and very important significance to superposition 
in quantum mechanics: 


12 Strictly speaking, V'(x) is the potential energy of the particle. Quantum physicists, however, refer 
to such functions as potentials , and, to stay in step, so will I. 

13 We must take account of the complex nature of the wave function when we form the probability 
distribution function; that is why we cannot write [^(a;, f)] 2 . For more on this matter, see § 3.4. 


Sec. 3.2 Systems and States Thereof 59 






2 2 



(0 


Figure 3.1 A complex of wave functions. “Snapshots” at t = 0 of the position probabil¬ 
ity amplitude for (a) a particle in a state represented by Eq. (3.13) with A = (1/27 t) 1 /‘ 1 
and (3 = \/2 (see also Examples 3.3-3.5); (b) a typical wave packet (Chap. 4); and 
(c) three states of a particle in a finite-squarc-well potential of width L (Chap. 9). 


The Principle of Superposition 

If and ^2 represent two physically-realizable states of a system, then the linear combi¬ 
nation # = ci^i + C 2 ^ 2 , where c\ and C 2 are arbitrary complex constants, represents a 
third physically-realizable state of the system. 


Actually, the Principle of Superposition is not restricted to linear combinations of 
only two quantum waves. In its most general form, this principle says that an arbitrary 
linear combination of any number —even an infinite number—of quantum waves repre¬ 
sents a new state of the system. More precisely: given N state functions of a system, 
{’Pi, # 2 , ^ 3 > ■ • • > ^n}, every linear combination 


N 

1 = 1 


(3.14) 


60 Chap. 3 First Postulates 






represents another state function. (The coefficients c, are arbitrary and may be real or 
complex.) The essential physical content of the Principle of Superposition is that for 
any choice of coefficients c,, Eq. (3.14) represents a state that can be realized in the 
laboratory. That is, we can construct from a given set of state functions an infinite 
number of other state functions, each new function corresponding to a different set of 
coefficients {ci,C 2 ,... , c/v}. And each linear combination we create represents a new 
' physically-realizable state. 

I hope it’s clear that the Principle of Superposition follows directly from our de¬ 
cision to represent physical states of microscopic particles by wave functions. This 
principle towers over the microworld, appearing time and time again in quantum physics 
and its applications. [In Chap. 6, for example, it will reappear in a particularly important 
property of the Schrodinger equation (linearity).] Remember it. 


*3.3 PROBABILITIES: A REVIEW 

In § 3.1 we inteipreted the quantum wave of a microscopic particle (an electron) in the 
double-slit experiment as a position probability amplitude. As we’ll see in § 3.4, this 
interpretation forms the backbone of quantum physics. In fact, the physical information 
contained in a state function is inherently probabilistic in nature. Hence probability 
theory is one of the most important mathematical and conceptual tools of every quantum 
mechanic. In this section we’ll briefly review this topic, as preparation for Postulate II. 14 

Ensembles 

In the real world, a rock concert is an event. But in the world of quantum physics, the 
word event refers to obtaining a particular result in a measurement of an observable on a 
microscopic system. For example, if we’re interested in measuring the position of a ball 
rolling in the x direction along a linear track, we might ask: what is the probability of 
finding the ball at x = 10 m? The definition of probability we use in quantum mechanics 
is expressed in terms of such events. 

A probability is an inherently statistical quantity. That is, you can’t define a 
probability in terms of a single system; you must do so by referring to a very large number 
of identical systems. These systems must also be independent of one another ( i.e ., not 
interacting with one another), and they must all be in the same physical state. A collection 
of identical systems that satisfies these criteria is called a statistical ensemble, or, more 
tersely, an ensemble. Take a moment to re-read, memorize, and ponder the concept of 
an ensemble; understanding ensembles is the key to understanding probabilities. 

The individual systems that comprise an ensemble are called its members. En¬ 
sembles are of special importance in quantum physics because in this discipline the word 
measurement refers to an ensemble measurement. To perform an ensemble measure¬ 
ment of an observable, we perform precisely the same experiment on the members of an 
ensemble of identical, non-interacting systems, all of which are in the same physical state. 

You may be wondering what, precisely, I mean by “identical systems”. Well, this 
phrase means just what it sounds like: the members of the ensemble must be identical 

14 If you feel comfortable with probabilities, means, and standard deviations, skip or skim this section. 
If you want more information than you find here, try the excellent, detailed discussion of probability and 
statistics in Chap. 2 of Statistical Physics by F. Reif (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965). In a lighter vein, see 
Lady Luck by W. Weaver (New York: Anchor Books, 1963). 


Sec. 3.3 Probabilities: A Review 61 



in their composition and in all their intrinsic properties. For example, an ensemble for 
measuring the position of the ball on the linear track would consist of a huge number 
of identical balls on identical linear tracks. In setting up such an ensemble, we would 
have to ensure that not only the properties of particles in different members but also 
the external forces on each system ( e.g ., gravity or external electromagnetic fields) are 
the same. And we must ensure that all members of the ensemble are in the same state. 
For example, all balls must follow the same trajectory on their respective tracks. For a 
microscopic system this condition requires that all members be represented by the same 
wave function. 15 

“Wait just a minute,” you may be thinking, “why would anyone ever carry out the 
same measurement on a huge number of identical systems all in the same physical state? 
Were I to do so, I would just get the same answer over and over again.” 

Well, yes and no. To be sure, in principle all results of an ensemble measurement 
of an observable, such as position, on a macroscopic system would be the same. 16 But 
this is not true of a quantum system: identical experiments performed on identical systems 
in identical quantum states need not — and, in general, do not — yield the same results. 
Like the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, this extraordinary statement is an intrinsic 
fact of nature, not a consequence of experimental imperfection. It would be no less 
true if the apparatus and the experimentalist using it were perfect! We’ll return to this 
disquieting notion in § 3.6. 


Probability Defined 

With all this chit-chat about ensembles out of the way, we are at last ready to define 
a probability. For the sake of clarity, we’ll start with a position probability, we can 
trivially extend this definition to any observable. 

Suppose we perform an ensemble measurement of the position of a particle that is 
constrained to move in the x direction. (For the moment, I won’t specify whether the 
particle is microscopic or macroscopic; for our present purposes the size of the system 
doesn’t matter.) Each member of the ensemble exhibits a particular value of x, and, 
since the ensemble consists of a huge number of members, we wind up with a lot of 
data. 

To organize all this data, let’s label the values we observe with an integral index 
j. Each different observed value of position gets a new integer, j = 1, 2, 3, ..., — on 
and on and on until we have labeled all the distinct values we obtained. Let M denote 
the maximum value of j. For convenience, we’ll arrange the resulting indexed values in 
ascending sequence, viz., 


X i ^ X2 ^ ^ ... ^ X. 


15 In his insighlful article “Probability Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics” [Amer. Jour. Phys., 48, 
1029 (1980)] Roger Newton notes that since all members of an ensemble are physically identical, we can 
identify a particular ensemble by the physical properties of its members. Extending this point, Newton defines 
the state of a quantum system as "[the symbolic representation of] the ensemble to which it belongs." 

lc But in the laboratory, members of an ensemble of macroscopic systems will yield different results, 
because of imprecision in the design and construction of the apparatus and in the experimentalist’s technique. 
Consequently, such experiments must be carried out on an ensemble in order to determine the experimental 
error inherent in the measurement. It is not, however, experimental error but rather “inherent imprecision” that 
infects measurements in the microverse. 


62 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



According to this scheme xm is the largest value of position exhibited by any member 
of the ensemble. Notice that if N is the total number of members in the ensemble , then 
M < N. 

Now, if the ensemble is large enough (N > 1), then any particular value of x 
can (and probably will) occur several times. So a list of observed values doesn’t fully 
describe the data. We must also note how many members exhibited each value Xj. Let’s 
denote this number by rij. We can now display the result of our ensemble measurement 
as follows: 


3Jl) 2 » 2 i 3»3j 3/ 41 .. ■ (3.15tf) 

n u n 2 , n 3 , n 4 ,... (3.156) 

But Eqs. (3.15) is a rather ungainly way to represent a large number of results— 
especially if our ensemble contained, say, 10,000 members. This information is more 
conveniently codifiqd in a function: the probability of obtaining a particular value of x. 
Moreover, introducing such a function will make easier our subsequent generalization of 
probability theory to an infinite ensemble. 

We determine the probability of obtaining the value Xj in an ensemble measurement 
of position from the fraction of members that yielded this value. To calculate this quantity 
we merely divide the number of systems that exhibit xj —the number rij in (3.156)—by 
the total number of experiments N : 

number of experiments that yield xj rtj (3 16) 

total number of experiments N' 

Now, the fraction rij/N depends explicitly on the number N of members in the 
ensemble. A more general quantity is the absolute position probability P(x), the 
generalization of (3.16a) to an infinite ensemble: 

Tl' 

P(x) = lim Absolute Position Probability (3.166) 

N—>oc N 

Note carefully that I have written the absolute probability as a function of x , not of xy, 
since the number of members in the ensemble described by (3.166) is infinite, we must 
treat position as a continuous variable. 

Mathematical Aside: Absolute versus Relative Normalization. Dividing each nj 
by N in Eqs. (3.16) “nonnalizes” the values of iij by putting them on a common scale. 

By itself, each integer iij describes only the relative probability that we will obtain Xj. 

(For example, by comparing 713 to 717 we can ascertain only the likelihood that we will 
obtain X3 as opposed to X7.) But the fraction rij/N tells us the “absolute” likelihood 
of obtaining the value Xj. That’s why P(x) is called the absolute probability. 

How could we represent pictorially the results of an ensemble measurement? Since 
ensembles in the lab are finite, only a finite number of values would be obtained in such 
a measurement; we could represent these data on a histogram, as in Fig. 3.2a. But the 
absolute probability P{x) is the extension of these data to an infinite ensemble. So this 
function is a continuous curve, as in Fig. 3.2b. 

Combinations and Normalization 

The algebra of probabilities in quantum mechanics is the same as in statistics. For 
example, suppose we must calculate the probability of obtaining one of two values 


Sec. 3.3 Probabilities: A Review 63 





Figure 3.2 Probability portraits, (a) A histogram displaying the results of a position 
measurement in which only eight values —xi through rcg—were found. The vertical axis 
shows the frequency with which each value was obtained, (b) A plot of the absolute 
position probability P{x), which is obtained in the limit N —* oo. The shaded area is 
the probability of finding the particle in the region x to x + dx. 


of position—say, x 3 or x 7 . These events are mutually exclusive — i.e., if you get x 3 , 
you didn’t get x 7 . According to the rule of combination of probabilities, the desired 
probability is simply the sum of the probabilities for each event, viz., 

P(x 3 or x 7 ) = P(x 3 ) + P(x 7 ). (3.17) 


To calculate the probability of finding one of several values, we just generalize 
(3.17): the probability of obtaining any of the values x\ or x 2 or x 3 or ... or xm is 


P(x i or ... or x M ) = P{x i) + P(x 2 ) + ... + P{x M ) 

M 

= 

3 = 1 


(3.18) 


where the summation includes all values of Xj in the list (3.15). 

This list includes every value obtained in the ensemble measurement. Since each 
member must exhibit one of these values, the “combined probability” (3.18) should 
equal 1. Let’s see if it does. Using the definition of P(xj) in (3.16a) we can write 
(3.18) as 

1 M 

P(x i or a: 2 or ... or x M ) = — ^ nj. (3.19) 

3 = 1 

But the sum of nj, the number of measurements that give Xj, over all possible values 
of Xj equals N. So, as advertised, 

P(x i or x 2 or ... x\i) = 1 [for a finite ensemble]. (3.20) 

This result follows because we normalized the individual probabilities in (3.16a). For 
this reason, we call (3.20) a normalization condition. 

The Position Probability Density 

I noted above that in the limit N —> oo the probability must be written as a function of the 
continuous variable x. Properly, we should call the function P(x) a probability density, 


64 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



because to calculate from this function the absolute probability, we must multiply it by an 
infinitesimal element of position dx. That is, the function P(x) is actually the position 
probability per unit length. The absolute probability of finding the particle at a value of 
x between, say, xo and xo + dx is P(xo)dx. 17 When we take account of the continuous 
nature of ru and the limit in the definition (3.16fr) of P{x), the normalization condition 
(3.20) becomes 

/ oo 

P(x)dx = 1. Normalization Condition (3.21) 

-OO — 

The Ensemble Average 

The probability density P(x) describes the results of an ensemble measurement of posi¬ 
tion. Appropriately, we characterize this kind of information as probabilistic informa¬ 
tion —a term which will become important later in this chapter. Another, more compact 
way to represent the same information is via statistical quantities, such as the ensemble 
average , which you may know under its colloquial name, the mean value. 

You know what I mean by the mean: To calculate, say, the mean grade of N 
students on a calculus exam, we just add their individual scores and divide the result 
by N. In this chapter, we’re concerned with the mean value of position—a quantity we 
denote by (a). 18 

It’s not hard to calculate this quantity for a measurement on a finite ensemble: we 
just add each xj in (3.15a) nj times and divide the resulting sum by N. Alternately, we 
could calculate the ensemble average from the probability (3.16a); viz., 

M 

(*> = Xj P( X j) [for a finite ensemble]. (3.22) 

3 =1 

The form of Eq. (3.22) makes sense. For a finite ensemble P(xj) is the fraction 
of measurements that yield the value Xj—a quantitative measure of how important xj is 
to (x). So we can treat this probability as a “weighting factor” for the position that is 
its argument. That is, we construct the average by multiplying each xj by its weighting 
factor P(xj) and summing over all (distinct) values. 

But position is a continuous quantity, so the probability appropriate to a position 
measurement is the position probability density P{x). To take this fact into account, we 
should alter slightly our definition (3.22) of the ensemble average ( x ), using an integral 
rather than a discrete sum. The probability of obtaining a value in the infinitesimal 
interval from x to x + dx is P(x)dx, so our expression for the ensemble average of 
position is 

f°° 

{x)= x P(x) dx. ensemble average (3.23) 

J -OC 

17 You may be wondering what it means to talk about finding a macroscopic particle in an infinitesimal 
interval of position. In a classical position measurement, such as the one we’re discussing, the particle is said 
to be “at x” if its center of mass (a point) is at x. With this understanding, we can meaningfully discuss 
finding such a particle between xo and xo + dx. 

18 The use of angle brackets is standard in quantum mechanics, where the mean—also known as the 
ensemble average —of an observable Q is symbolized by (Q). You’ll see more means in Chap. 5, where we 
study the property of generic observables. 


Sec. 3.3 Probabilities: A Review 65 



In quantum theory, the mean value of position is called its expectation value. You’ll be 
formally introduced to the expectation value in § 3.6. 

Aside: What Does “Mean” Mean? You probably already have a good feeling 
for the mean. But a word of caution: Many novice quantum mechanics confuse the 
ensemble average of an observable with that observable’s most probable value .< The 
most probable value of position is not the mean value; it is the value of x at which 
the particle is most likely to be found. You can figure out the most probable value 
of position from P{x), but you probably won’t get the value (x). The distinction 
between these two quantities is illustrated in Fig. 3.3. 




(a) (b) 

Figure 3.3 Two probability densities that illustrate the difference between the most 
probable value of a: (the dashed line) and the average value of .r (the arrow). In (a) 
the symmetry of the probability density about the dashed line causes (x) to occur at the 
same place as the most probable x. But in (b) the probability density is skewed, so (x) 
is displaced to the right of the most probable value. 


The Dispersion 

The ensemble average is a useful piece of information. But it doesn’t tell the whole 
story. For example, the mean value of the temperature in a normal year in Oklahoma is 
pretty close to 70° F; but this number by itself doesn’t tell you that over the course of 
a typical year the temperature ranges from a nippy 10° or so below zero in the winter 
to a toasty 110° in the summer—information you might well want if you’re considering 
moving there. That is, by itself the mean temperature is deceptive. 

Far more information is communicated by probability densities, such as those in 
Fig. 3.4. The ensemble averages of position for these densities are the same, yet the 
probability functions themselves are quite different. The results described by the curve 
in Fig. 3.4a are all roughly the same: x « ( x ). In contrast, the data represented in 
Fig. 3.4b embraces a wide range of values about (x). Clearly, to describe the results 
of an ensemble measurement, we need a second number, one that describes the spread 
or fluctuation of individual results about their ensemble average. Happily, the theory of 
statistics provides such a number: the dispersion. 

/The dispersion is a quantitative measure of the extent to which individual results 
fluctuate about the ensemble average. 19 Together with the mean value, the dispersion 


lu This quantity is also known as the variance or, more commonly, the mean square deviation. In many 
important applications it depends on time and so carries a t dependence; see Pblm 1.2. 


66 Chap. 3 First Postulates 






Figure 3.4 Two probability densities that illustrate the limitations of the ensemble 
average (.r). Individual results that give the narrow probability density in (a) fluctuate 
very little about ( x ) and hence give a small standard deviation, in contrast to the broad 
distribution of (b). 


accurately yet compactly characterizes a large amount of data. For instance, the disper¬ 
sion of the temperature in Oklahoma is enormous; while that in Houston is small—it is 
the high mean value there that is the problem. 

The definition of the dispersion of a quantity comes to us from the theory of 
probability. For a position measurement, the dispersion of the results about ( x) is 
defined as 

(Ax) 2 = ( (x — (x)) 2 ) . dispersion (3.24) 

The right-hand side of (3.24) is not especially simple; it instructs us to take the average 
of the square of the difference between x and (x). But you might as well commit it to 
memory; you’re going to need it. 

This definition may seem somewhat arbitrary, but I think it makes sense. Since 
the dispersion is supposed to be a single number that characterizes the fluctuations of a 
large number of results about their mean, it is not surprising that this quantity be defined 
in terms of an average. But most other quantities we might consider, such as x — (x), 
are unsatisfactory. Can you deduce why? 

Question 3-1 

Show that the mean value of x — (x) is zero. Also show that the dispersion as defined in 

(3.24) is necessarily non-negative. 


In statistics (and in quantum mechanics) fluctuations of data about their mean are usually 
described by the square root of the dispersion. This number is called the standard 
deviation: 


Ax = \/{ Ax) 2 = [ ((x - (x)) 2 )] 1 / 2 . standard deviation (3.25) 

You need to get a feeling for the implications of a large (or small) standard deviation. A 
small Ax corresponds to the situation illustrated in Fig. 3.4a, where every member in the 
ensemble yields a value of x close to (x). A huge Ax, on the other hand, corresponds to 
the situation in Fig. 3.4b, where the data falls all over the place. Evidently, if the state 


Sec. 3.3 Probabilities: A Review 67 



of a system is characterized by a very large dispersion in position, we don’t know what 
to expect in a measurement of this observable. We are uncertain . 20 

Question 3-2 

Consider experiments to measure the energy of (a) a racquetball confined to a cubical court, 
and (b) a conduction electron in a metal. Write down prescriptions for calculating the 
ensemble average and standard deviation for these measurements. 

3.4 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO BORN 

Erwin with his psi can do 
Calculations quite a few. 

But one thing has not been seen 
Just what does psi really mean. 

—Walter Hiickel 

(translated by Felix Bloch) 

According to Postulate I, the wave function is the basic element of quantum physics: 
Every physical state of a quantum system is represented by a wave function vp that 
contains all that we can know about the physical properties of the system in that state. 21 
But this postulate does not address the physical meaning of the wave function whose 
existence it hypothesizes. The interpretation of the state function is crucial to its use: 
we must know how to extract physical information from this function. But at present 
we know only that 'P is complex and depends on position and time; as such, it seems 
resistant to straightforward physical interpretation. 

Since the early days of quantum physics this issue—just what does the state function 
mean?—has been a source of controversy. Since the 1930s physicists have known how to 
calculate state functions and use them to predict and explain the physics of a wide range 
of microscopic systems; but they have been unable to agree on an interpretation of these 
functions. In his excellent book The Quantum Physicists and an Introduction to their 
Physics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970), William H. Cropper summarizes 
the situation thusly: 

The modem physicist is forced to admit, with some embarrassment, that although he 
can formulate a powerful and beautiful mathematical theory of atomic and molecular 
behavior, he cannot be sure he knows exactly what that theory means. 

To be sure, the literature of quantum physics is replete with different interpretations 
of the state function—some of which are pretty wild (see the Selected Readings for 

20 You guessed it: In quantum mechanics A.r is the position uncertainty. As we’ll leam in § 3.6, the 
uncertainty for a given state is calculated from the wave function of the state. 

21 Actually, there exist in nature states that cannot be represented by a wave function. These states 
are called mixed states ; a quantum state that can be represented by a wave function is called a pure state. 
The distinction between mixed and pure states is beyond our scope at present, but I should note the condition 
for a pure state: A system is in a pure state if it is impossible, by any measurement, to distinguish one 
member of the ensemble from any other member. For more on mixed states, take a look at Compliment E 
of Chapter III in Quantum Mechanics, Volume I by Claude Cohen-Tannoudji, Bernard Diu, and Franck Laloe 
(New York: Wiley-Interscicnce, 1977) or at the more specialized and advanced treatise Density Matrix Theory 
and Applications by Karl Blum (New York: Plenum, 1981). 


68 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



this chapter). But none can be proven correct. In this book, I’ll show you the most 
widely held view of quantum mechanics: the Copenhagen Interpretation. This theory 
is founded on an interpretation of the state function due to Max Born (1882-1970). 

We’ve already used this interpretation (although I didn’t identify it as such) in 
§3.1. There we explained the behavior of electrons in the double-slit experiment by 
associating with them a “quantum probability wave.’’ This is Born’s idea: 22 


wave function ^ = position probability amplitude 

Although it’s easy to express this notion mathematically, to fully understand it we must 
delve more deeply into the meaning of measurement in quantum mechanics. 

The Meaning of a Measurement on a Quantum System 

Were we concerned with macroscopic (classical) physics, we could discuss experiments 
on individual systems. That is, because information about observables for a macroscopic 
system is not inherently probabilistic, we don’t have to talk about such experiments 
in terms of ensembles—although it’s often useful to do so. But, as already noted, the 
situation in the microscopic universe is quite different. 

Quantum mechanics speaks the language of probabilities, and as discussed in the 
last section, probabilities are defined in terms of ensembles. This feature of quantum 
theory is of paramount importance: 


Rule 

Quantum mechanics describes the outcomes of ensemble measurements, where an ensemble 
measurement consists of a very large number of identical experiments performed on iden¬ 
tical, non-interacting systems all of which have been identically prepared so as to be in the 
same state. 


In quantum physics, a state is specified by a wave function, so when we say “the members 
of the ensemble are in the same state,” we mean that they are represented by the same 
wave function. This vital definition is summarized in Fig. 3.5. 

Aside: Ensembles versus Individual Systems. It’s not unrealistic for us to restrict 
quantum theory to statements about ensembles (rather than about individual systems). 

Most laboratory experiments are performed on ensembles of microscopic systems. 

For example, in a typical collision experiment, we fire a beam of particles—say, 
electrons—at a dilute gas of target particles—say, sodium (Na) atoms. Ideally, the 
particles in the beam would be mono-energetic (i.e., they would all have the same 
energy) and would not interact with one another. (Actually, the particles’ energy is 
uncertain, and the experimentalist tries to set up conditions that reduce interactions 
to a minimum.) Such a beam is the most famous example of a quantum ensemble, 
because prior to the collision all particles in it are in the same state. 

The same must be true of the target atoms. We could enforce this condition 
by using a laser to ensure that all the Na atoms are in the same state before collision. 

We could then perform all sorts of interesting experiments: for example, we could 


22 In this chapter we’ll explore the Born interpretation only for position. But as you work through 
Volume I, you’ll learn how to construct probability amplitudes for other observables (e.g„ momentum in 
§ 4.6). Remember that the only thing special about position is that it’s the focus of this chapter. 


Sec. 3.4 The Gospel According to Born 69 





^ 

#1 

#2 

#3 ' 

#4 

#5 

#6 

#7 

#8 

#9 

\ 

e m 


* 


'F 


* 


* 


'I' 


* 


* 


* 


* 


Result of position 
measurement 


*4 *2 X 5 


Figure 3.5 A schematic representation of a quantum ensemble. In this 
figure, the (microscopic) system is represented by a little box. The en¬ 
semble is constructed by replicating the system many times; the total 
number of members in the ensemble is N. (Note that N should be huge.) 

All member systems must be prepared in the same way so that prior to 
measurement they are in the same state. I have indicated this important 
condition by labelling each member (box) by the symbol '!>. (This state 
function therefore labels the ensemble as a whole.) 

measure the energy levels of Na atoms by observing the frequencies of photons 
emitted when excited Na atoms decay after excitation by electrons. 

Each individual system consists of an electron and a Na atom , but we perform 
the experiment on an ensemble of such systems. So a physicist who says “we measure 
the energy of the Na atom” actually means “we simultaneously determine the energy 
of all members of the ensemble of Na atoms.” Our mission is to calculate the state 
function for the system and use this function to predict and explain the results of such 
measurements. 


The Bom Interpretation 

Let’s now codify Born’s solution to the problem of how to get information out of a 
quantum state function in another postulate. The plan, recall, is to interpret such a 
function as a probability amplitude —a quantity whose squared modulus is a probability 
density. Expressed in terms of position, this new postulate reads: 



The Second Postulate of Quantum Mechanics 

If a system is in a quantum state represented by a wave function 'I', then Pdv = |^| 2 dv 
is the probability that in a position measurement at time t the particle will be detected in 
the infinitesimal volume element dv. 


For a one-dimensional, single-particle system the wave function is simply a function 
of x and t , and the position probability density is ^(.t, £)| 2 . So for such a system, the 
Born interpretation asserts that P(x{),t)dx is the probability of finding the particle at 
time t in an infinitesimal region dx about the particular point xq. 

It’s easy to generalize this postulate to systems in (two or) three dimensions and 
even to systems that consist of many particles. For example, the probability density for 
a single particle in three dimensions in a state represented by the wave function ^(r, t) 
is 

P(r,t) = |4<(r,t)| 2 = $'(r,t)*(r,t). 

The probability of finding such a particle in an infinitesimal three-dimensional volume 
element d?r about r () is just what you would expect: 

P{r lh t)dv = 


70 Chap. 3 First Postulates 






Note that the absolute value bars in Born’s expression |^| 2 for the probability 
density are essential: this density must be real, but in general the wave function $ is 
complex. The probability density must be real because it appears in quantum mechanical 
expressions for quantities such as the mean value of position (see § 3.6)— quantities that 
could he measured in the laboratory and hence must be real numbers. 

Example 3.2. An Ensemble of Square Wells 

In Part IV, we’ll investigate several applications of quantum mechanics to single-particle, 
one-dimensional systems. One of the most important of these is the symmetric infinite square 
well shown in Fig. 3.6a. 23 The probability amplitudes (state functions) and corresponding 
position probability densities (at time t = 0) for several states of the square well are graphed 
in Fig. 3.6b. 

The wave functions in Fig. 3.6b illustrate some important, peculiar features of quantum 
states. For example, in the state represented by ^ 2 , the probability of finding the particle at 
t = 0 in an infinitesimal “volume” element clx about the position xo = L/4 is quite large. 
This fact seems simple, but it is really rather subtle. Each member of the ensemble—i.e., 
each particle in its box—is either in the volume element centered on .t 0 = L/4 or it isn’t; 
what 'I *2 tells us is that in an ensemble measurement of position, a large number of members 
will exhibit a value very near or equal to xo = L/4. In contrast, the probability of finding 
a particle in a volume element near x 0 = 0 is very small. (Notice that the wave function is 
zero at x = 0, so the probability P 2 (0,0)dx = |^ 2 (0,0)| 2 rf.T is also zero at that point.] 

The Integrated Probability 


In a real experiment we cannot locate a particle at a point', at best we may be able to 
determine if the particle is in a very small but finite region of position values— e.g., in the 
interval from x = a to x = b. So we need to know how to calculate the probability of 
finding the particle somewhere in a finite region. (Since we cannot measure position more 
accurately than this, we don’t care where in the region the particle is.) Such a calculation 
poses no logical problem: we merely sum the individual probabilities P(x,t)dx for all 
values of a; in the interval [a, 6]. Now, for a continuous variable such as x, “sum” means 
“integrate,” so the desired probability is 


probability of detection in [a,b] = P{ [a, b ], t ) 

rb 


rl) rb 

= / P(x,t)dx = / \^(x,t)\ 2 dx 
J a J a 


(3.26) 


Interlude: What Quantum Mechanics Can’t Do 


Born’s idea, as codified in Postulate II, provides the vital link between the mathematical 
function and the physical state it represents. Armed with this interpretation such 
physicists as Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schrodinger rapidly developed the machinery 
for extracting from wave functions information about position, momentum, and a host 
of other observables. We’ll explore their work in Chap. 5 and Part IV. 


23 The particle in a square well is no mere academic example; in current research it is used to model 
a variety of physical systems, such as conduction electrons in some solids and electrons in certain organic 
molecules. You’ll see an example of what I mean in § 8.9. 


Sec. 3.4 The Gospel According to Born 71 






(b) 



Figure 3.6 (a) The infinite square well 
potential energy, (b) Four “bound-state” 
wave functions of the square well and their 
probability densities (at t = 0). (c) At 
t — 0, a particle in state ^2 is quite 
likely to be found in the “volume” element 
dx at xo = L/4. 


Still, although quantum mechanics is quite powerful, there are some questions that 
it simply does not address. These limitations are best explained by example. 

Consider an ensemble consisting of, say, Avogadro’s number of radioactive nuclei. 
Each nucleus of each atom is in the same quantum state as every other nucleus. Nuclei 
decay. So, pondering the future of our ensemble, we might formulate two questions: 


72 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



1. What is the likelihood that in a particular time interval any nucleus in the ensemble 
will decay? 

2. Will a particular nucleus decay in this time interval? 

The first of these queries addresses the behavior of the collection of identical 
systems that comprise the ensemble. Since quantum physics pertains to ensembles, it 
can, in piinciple, provide an answer to this question. But the second question concerns 
the behavior of a specific member of an ensemble. Such a question is beyond the scope 
of any theory that speaks only the language of ensemble probabilities. In fact, individual 
nuclei in such an ensemble decay at different times. But Copenhagen quantum physics 
cannot explain this fact, except to argue that the behavior of a particular member of an 
ensemble is governed by random chance. This viewpoint, you might guess, takes a little 
getting used to. 


3.5 HOW TO NORMALIZE A STATE FUNCTION 



In our review of probabilities (§ 3.3), I noted that the absolute probability density P{x) 
obeys the normalization condition [Eq. (3.21)] 



(3.27) 


We must ensure that quantum-mechanical probability densities, as calculated from state 
functions, satisfy this condition. In this section, we’ll see how to enforce the normaliza¬ 
tion condition—an ability we’ll need throughout the rest of our journey through quantum 
physics. 


The Normalization Condition 


The importance of normalization follows from the Born inteipretation of the state function 
as a position probability amplitude. According to § 3.4, we interpret the integrated 
probability density on the left-hand side of (3.27) as the probability that in a position 
measurement at time t we will find the particle anywhere in space. [This integral is just 
the generalization of the one in Eq. (3.26) to all space: a = -oo and b = +oc.] Now, 
think physically for a moment: what should be the value of this integral? 

The particle does exist , so this integral must equal 1. All this is to say that for 
the Born interpretation of a state function to make sense, the position probability density 
calculated from the state function must be an absolute probability density. As such, it 
must satisfy the normalization condition (3.27), which we write: 


Normalization Condition (3.28a) 


A bit of jargon: The integral over all space of the probability density is sometimes called 
the normalization integral; and a mathematical function # whose normalization integral 
equals 1 is said to be normalized . 24 


r oc 

roc 

II 

HO 

/ '&(x i t)*ty(x,t)dx = l 

J — oc u 

l —oo 


24 In mathematics, functions satisfying (3.28) are said to be “square-integrable.” For more on the 
mathematical underpinnings of quantum theory, see J. M. Jauch, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Reading 
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1968). 


Sec. 3.5 How to Normalize a State Function 73 




You should have little trouble generalizing the normalization condition (3.28a) 
to simple three-dimensional systems. Consider a single particle in three dimensions 
in a state represented by the wave function ^(r,f). The normalization integral is the 
probability of finding the particle anywhere in space, so in this case we must integrate 
over all space— i.e., we require a three-fold integral with respect to the infinitesimal 
volume element dv = d 3 r: 

= 1. (3.286) 

Sometimes we find (or derive) a wave function whose normalization integral 
doesn’t satisfy the normalization condition. If this integral is finite, then we can fix 
the wave function—we can normalize it, using a procedure I’ll describe in a moment. A 
function that can be normalized is, sensibly, said to be normalizable. 

In physics, normalizable functions are particularly important, for only normalizable 
functions can represent a quantum state. For this reason, we say that such functions are 
physically admissible. 

But if the normalization integral is infinite, we’re in trouble. Such a function can¬ 
not be normalized and hence cannot properly represent a quantum state. 25 The reason is 
that we can’t meaningfully inteipret the squared modulus of a function whose normal¬ 
ization integral is infinite as a probability density. The probability of finding the particle 
anywhere in space in a position measurement is not infinity; it’s unity. 

The normalization condition exemplifies the beautiful interplay of physics and 
mathematics that characterizes quantum mechanics. Here a physical constraint —that a 
quantum particle must exist—corresponds to a mathematical limitation on the class of 
functions that can represent states in nature. As we proceed, you should be on the alert 
for other strands in the fabric of mathematics and physics that is quantum mechanics. You 
may find, as I do, that these are among the most marvelous features of this remarkable 
physical theory. 

Aside: The Constancy of Normalization. Another (equally sensible) consequence 
of the normalization conditions (3.28) is that the integral dx 

doesn’t depend on the time. Obviously, the probability of detecting the particle 
anywhere is unity no matter when we perform the measurement. So a function 
once normalized, stays normalized. To prove this fact, we need the time-dependent 
Schrodinger Equation, which will appear in Chap. 6 (see § 6.5). 

The Normalization Requirement and Boundary Conditions 

The demand that the normalization integral equal 1 constrains the mathematical form 
of the wave function in a rather subtle way. Many novice quantum mechanics incor¬ 
rectly infer from the normalization condition that the state function itself cannot extend 
throughout space— i.e., that ^{x,t) must be non-zero only in a finite region of space. 
Although reasonable, this deduction is wrong. 

To avoid such logical pitfalls, we must always focus on precisely what the equations 
of quantum mechanics mean. Equation (3.28a) doesn’t prohibit a wave function ^{x,t) 

25 Notice the qualifier properly. As we’ll see in Chap. 8, there exist solutions to the time-dependent 
Schrodinger Equation that are mathematically valid but not physically admissible because their normalization 
integral is infinite. Yet, non-normalizable functions play an important role in quantum mechanics, especially 
in the study of scattering processes. 




74 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



from having infinite extent, if as x approaches ±oo, the function decays to zero rapidly 
enough that the normalization integral is finite. So the condition that follows logically 
from this equation is 

—» 0 as | x | —► oo rapidly enough. (3.29) 

We’ll illustrate this condition in Example 3.3. Equation (3.29) is called a “boundary 
condition” on the function ty(x,t), because it is a condition that function must satisfy at 
a “boundary.” 26 I’ll have more to say about boundary conditions in Chap. 6, and we’ll 
explore their consequences throughout the remainder of this book. 

How to Normalize 

Enough abstract theory. Suppose we’re confronted with a function ^(x.f) whose nor¬ 
malization integral is equal to a finite number other than 1: 

/ oo 

V'fat)*W(x t t)dx = M. (3.30) 

-oo 


What to do? 

I’m sure you’re ahead of me. To obtain from ^'(.T,f) a function whose normal¬ 
ization integral is unity we just multiply the offending function by the constant l/y/M. 
The resulting function 


$(£,£) = — ^'(aijf) [normalized state function] 

VM 

satisfies the desired condition 



1 

y/M 


*'(M) 



(3.31a) 


(3.316) 


and so is physically admissible. [Of course, if the integral in Eq. (3.30) is infinite, this 
gambit fails spectacularly.] 

Example 3.3. Subduing a Normalizable State Function 

To see how the normalization procedure works, let’s return to the wave function of a particle 
with a simple harmonic oscillator potential that we saw in Example 3.2 [Eq. (3.13)]: 

*'(*.0 = (3.32a) 


Evaluating the normalization integral for the function (3.32a), we find 



tf'(s,f)*tt'(:r,t)<te = A 2 



—/3 2 x 2 


dx = A 2 



(3.32 h) 


26 You may be wondering where the “boundary" in (3.29) is. The name “boundary condition" evokes 
a condition that a function must satisfy at some point. But Eq. (3.29) is a condition the wave function must 
satisfy in the limit |x| -*• oo. Nevertheless, in the parlance of the field, such a requirement is called a boundary 
condition. 


Sec. 3.5 How to Normalize a State Function 75 




(Notice what happened to the time dependence in the normalization integral.) Clearly, 
^'{x, t) is normalizable—and hence physically admissible (i.e., this function can repre¬ 
sent a quantum state). But, equally clearly, its normalization integral isn’t equal to 1. This 
defect is easily remedied: we just choose the “normalization constant” A in (3.32a) so that 
A 2 = fi 2 /it, i.e.. 


A = 



(3.32c) 


This choice gives as the normalized counterpart of ty'(x,t), the function 

rft \ 1/4 

e -/3 2 z 2 /2 e ~iEtlh ( 3 . 33 ) 

[You can find a graph of this function (at t. = 0) in Fig. 3.1a.] Since the Gaussian function 
(3.32a) can be normalized, it is a viable candidate for state-function-hood. 27 Before I leave 
this example, I want to reinforce its moral: 



Rule 

Unless you know that a state function is normalized, your first step—before you calculate 
anything physical from the function—should be to check that it is normalizable and, if so, 
to normalize it. 


Quantum Arbitrariness 

Example 3 illustrates one way to construct a normalized function. “But,” you may be 
wondering, “is my newly normalized function 

= ~^= *'(*,*) (3.34) 

unique: is it the only normalized function I can construct from 4>'(a;, £)?” The answer— 
which may surprise you—lurks in the Born interpretation. 

Recall that the normalization condition is expressed in terms of the position proba¬ 
bility density—the product |^(x, t)\ 2 = £)*^(x, £). Consequently we can multiply 

the state function by any complex number of unit modulus without changing the prob¬ 
ability density. That is, we can multiply by e lS , where S is any real number, 

without changing the nonnalization integral. 28 In the probability density constructed 
from e x6 '^{x ) t), all dependence on 8 disappears because 

(e i6 Y e i6 = e~ ib e iS = e° = 1. (3.35) 


27 There are, however, restrictions other than normalizability that a prospective state function must 
satisfy if it is to represent a quantum state. I’ll discuss some of these mathematical conditions at the end of this 
section. Beyond these, a state function must satisfy the equation of motion of the system—the time-dependent 
Schrodinger Equation (see Chap. 6). 

28 Any complex number 2 whose modulus is unity can be written as 2 = e ,6 for some real number 6. 
If this assertion isn’t familiar, take a few minutes to review Appendix K. 


76 Chap. 3 First Postulates 




Ergo all functions of the form 


*(s,t) = e«-L *'(*,0 
lead to the same normalization integral: 


i*(*,t)i a = *(»,*)* *(*,«) 

= 'S #wr 

= i !*'(*■<) i 2 - 



*'(M) 


(3.36) 


(3.37) 


Regardless of the value of 6 (which may, of course, be zero), the function (3.36) will 
obey the normalization condition (3.28). 

We have discovered that the wave function—the state descriptor of quantum physics— 
is, to an extent, arbitrary! This result should strike you as a bit odd; it certainly doesn’t 
pertain to the more familiar state descriptor of classical physics : the trajectory that rep¬ 
resents a particular classical state of a particle is unique. The factor e iS is called a global 
phase factor, so what we’ve learned is: a state function is arbitrary to within a global 
phase factor. 

I view this “quantum arbitrariness” as an artifact of the theory. (A useful artifact, 
because quantum arbitrariness often comes in handy in problem solving.) By this I mean 
that we cannot detect the arbitrariness of the state function via measurement. As we’ll 
soon see, the global phase factor vanishes from all quantum mechanical expressions for 
quantities we can measure. This disappearing act works for the same reason the phase 
factor vanished from the probability density in (3.35): quantum mechanical expressions 
for measurable quantities inevitably involve the probability density, which is the product 
'I'. Form this product, and Eq. (3.35) will eliminate the phase factor for you. 

For instance, we cannot distinguish by any physical measurement the states repre¬ 
sented by the functions 

e i6 V(x t t ) = (s, t) (6 = 0) (3.38a) 

and 

e i6 V(x,t) = -9(x,t) (« = jt) (3.38 b) 


The point to remember is: 


J 

Rule 

Two state functions that differ only by a global phase factor, ^ and e' 6 ^, represent the 
same physical state of the system. 


Additional Restrictions on the Wave Function 

We have seen how the physical fact that (even in the weird world of quantum mechanics) 
a particle must exist somewhere restricts the class of physically admissible functions to 

Sec. 3.5 How to Normalize a State Function 77 




those that are normalizable. But normalizability is not the only mathematical condition 
a function must satisfy if it is to represent a quantum state. 

The first of these conditions follows from the Born interpretation of the state 
function as a position probability amplitude. At any time the value of the probability 
for finding the particle in an infinitesimal region of space must be unique. This implies 
that the state function must assume only one value at each time— i.e., that it must be 
single-valued. Consider, for contrast, the multi-valued beast in Fig. 3.7a. Since the 
squared modulus of this function has two values, it can’t be understood as a position 
probability density. Hence this double-valued function is useless as a state descriptor in 
quantum physics. 

Additional restrictions follow from the equation of motion of quantum mechanics: 
the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation. We’ll study this equation, which towers over 
the many and varied implementations and applications of quantum physics, in Chap. 6. 
But, by way of preview, here it is for a particle in one dimension with potential energy 
V(x): 

2 4, ( a:,t ) + V(a)*(*,t) = ih~'S>(x,t). (3.39) 

What conditions follow from this equation? Look at its first term. See the second 
derivative of with respect to xl Speaking mathematically, we cannot even 

define this derivative unless the first derivative of the function in question, 
is continuous. 29 Mathematicians call a function whose first derivative is everywhere 
continuous a smoothly varying function. So we conclude that the wave function must 
be smoothly varying. It can’t have any kinks (see Fig. 3.7c). 

Another condition also follows from the presence of the second derivative 
d 2 ^(x i t)/dx 2 in the Schrodinger equation (3.39). We define the second derivative 
in terms of the first derivative, and we can define the first derivative only if the function 
being differentiated is itself continuous. Incidentally, the Born interpretation provides 
another incentive to require that 'f?(x y t) be continuous: if it weren’t, then at a point of 
discontinuity, the value of its modulus squared would not be unique, in which case we 
could not meaningfully interpret this value as the position probability density. 

To summarize: 


Rule 

A function is physically admissible and hence may represent a state of a quantum system if 
it is single-valued, continuous, smoothly varying, and normalizable—and if it satisfies the 
system’s Schrodinger Equation (3.39). 


Aside: The Finiteness of Wave Functions. State functions are also finite at all 
points—usually. But don’t misconstrue this observation as a requirement ; a state 
function can be infinite at a point provided that the mathematical nature of this 
singularity is such that the normalization integral formed from the function is finite. 
We’ll come across some examples of this curiosity when (in Part V) we focus on 
three-dimensional systems. 


29 For a proof of this assertion, see Chap. 2 of Quantum Physics by Rolf G. Winter (Belmont, Ca.: 
Wadsworth, 1979). If you want to read further on the mathematical requirements of wave functions, see the 
aforementioned book by Jauch. 


78 Chap. 3 First Postulates 




*(x, 0) 


'Hx, 0) 



{a) Single-valued 




(b) Continuous 




(c) Smoothly varying 

Figure 3.7 Valid and useless one-dimensional functions. In each case, the functions 
sketched on the right of this figure are not physically admissible. They fail because they 
are not (a) single-valued; (b) continuous; and (c) smoothly-varying. The functions on 
the left are Ok. 


3.6 GREAT EXPECTATIONS (AND UNCERTAINTIES) 

The Born interpretation enables us to determine from a wave function a particular kind 
of information: probabilistic information. We can use the probability density to answer 
the question: in an ensemble measurement of position at time t, what is the probability 
that a member of the ensemble will exhibit a value in the infinitesimal range from x to 
x + dx? But in § 3.3 I introduced another kind of information: statistical information. To 
characterize the results of an experiment, we use two statistical quantities—the ensemble 
average and the standard deviation. These are, respectively, the mean value of the results 


Sec. 3.6 Great Expectations (and Uncertainties) 79 



and a measure of the extent to which these results fluctuate around the mean. For the 
observable we’re considering in this chapter, position, the ensemble average is denoted 
by ( x) and the uncertainty by Ax. But how do we calculate these quantities from a state 
function? The answer follows easily from their definitions and the Bom Interpretation. 

The Expectation Value 

In quantum theory, the ensemble average of an observable for a particular state of the 
system is called the expectation value of that observable. Thus, ( x ) answers the question: 
what is the average of the results that would be obtained in an ensemble measurement of 
position performed at time t on a system in a state represented by ^(x y t)? 

To obtain an expression for (x) we need only adapt the definition (3.23) of the 
ensemble average (the mean) to quantum mechanics. This definition, 



x P(x) dx> 


instructs us to integrate over all values of x ( i.e ., over the whole range of the spatial 
coordinate of a one-dimensional wave function), thereby accumulating the product of 
each possible value of the observable x and its “weighting function” P(x,t). Using 
Postulate II to write the probability density in terms of ^(a:, f), we obtain 30 



r°° 

H.y 

xP(x,t ) dx 

-oo 

fOC 

J 

1 ^(rc, t)* x ty(x,t)dx. 

—oo 


Expectation Value of Position 


(3.40a) 


Notice that we must integrate over the whole "space" of the wave function. For a one¬ 
dimensional system, this entails only a single integration from — oo to +oo. But for a 
single particle in three dimensions, we must write the expectation value as an integration 
over three spatial coordinates, with the differential volume element dv\ viz., 

{x) = J x^(r, t)dv. (3.40/?) 

Now, (x) is the average of data from a position measurement on an ensemble of 
particles in state This value can be determined in the laboratory and hence must be 
a real number. And, sure enough, it is. Since the probability density is a real 
function, and the spatial coordinate x assumes only real values, the integrals (3.40) are 
also real. 31 

Question 3-3 

Write the state function ’!'( x,t ) as the sum of real and imaginary parts and prove that 

P(x,t) is real. 

3(, It may seem perverse to put x in between #( x,t )* and ty(x, t) in this definition. But this form for 
expectation values is standard—for reasons that will become clear in Chap. 5. 

31 Any number c with the property that c* = c is real. This property (see Appendix K) provides one 
way to prove that (x) is real. 


80 Chap. 3 First Postulates 




Before turning to a sample calculation of an expectation value, I want to note some 
of the important properties of this quantity. First, in the definitions (3.40) we integrate 
only over spatial variables. So in general, the expectation value (x ) depends on time. 
From time to time, I’ll explicitly indicate this dependence, writing the expectation value 
with the slightly ungainly notation ( x ) ( t ). 

A second important property of this quantity is its dependence on the state of the 
system : different quantum states, represented by different state functions, have different 
ensemble averages. This statement sounds obvious, but, perhaps because this depen¬ 
dence is not explicitly indicated by the symbol for the expectation value, it’s easy to 
overlook. Figure 3.8 illustrates the state-dependence of ( x) by comparing the probability 
densities and corresponding expectation values for two states of the finite square well 
(see Example 3.2). 



Figure 3.8 Snapshots at fixed times t of two probability densities for the finite square 
well and the corresponding expectation values. Clearly, (x) depends on the state of the 
system. 


Example 3.4. Expectation Value of Position for a Particle 

Consider a microscopic particle with a simple harmonic oscillator potential in a quantum 
state represented by the wave function we normalized in Example 3.3. To simplify the 
algebra in this, our first example, let’s suppose that the properties of the oscillator are such 
that the constant 0=1, leaving the more general case for Chap. 9. In this case the wave 
function (3.33) is simply 

*(*,«)= (;) ,/4 «“*’ / *«"‘“ / *- (3.4i) 

Let’s calculate the average value we would obtain in a measurement at t = 0 of the position 
of an ensemble of particles in this state. 

According to the definition (3.40a), the expectation value of x at t = 0 for this state 
is 


(®> = \ ~ 



dx. 


(3.42) 


To evaluate this integral, we could dive for our integral tables and start scribbling. Or we 
could think for a moment. I recommend the latter approach. 

When faced with a manipulation of this sort, the first thing you ought to do is to check 
the parity of the integrand: i.e., determine if it is an even or an odd function. 32 So let’s 


32 Recall that the parity of a function /(x) is even if f(-x) = f(x) and is odd if f(-x) = -/(x). 

Sec. 3.6 Great Expectations (and Uncertainties) 81 



2 

examine the integrand in Eq. (3.42), which I’ll call I(x). This function, I(x) = xe~ x , is 
odd, because I(—x) = —I{x). But the integral from -oo to +oo of any odd function is 
necessarily zero. Equation (3.42) contains just such an integral, so we conclude that 


(.r) = 0 


for ^(.x’,0) = 


iv /4 e -* : 


/2 


(3.43) 


Question 3-4 

Does Eq. (3.43) hold for t > 0? Prove your answer. 

By the way, be careful when you interpret a result such as Eq. (3.43). In particular, 
be wary of deducing from a statistical quantity , such as the mean value, conclusions about 
the nature of the ensemble on which the measurement was performed. For example, we 
can imagine two quite different ensembles that would yield (x ) = 0: 

1. an ensemble all members of which exhibit x = 0 in the position measurement; 

2. an ensemble such that each member that yields a non-zero value, say xo, is 

“matched” by a member that yields — xo. 

In a measurement on the second ensemble, an equal fraction of members exhibit 
+x and —x, so the mean is zero. We cannot distinguish between these two cases without 
additional information—which you will find later in this section. 

The Expectation Value of a Generic Observable 

Most observables can be written as functions of position and momentum. We’ll tackle 
the quantum mechanical treatment of momentum in Chap. 5 and so will defer until then 
the question of how to calculate the expectation value of an arbitrary observable. But 
many observables are functions of position only, and we know enough to write down 
the form of the expectation value for such an observable. 

Let’s denote by Q(x) a generic observable that depends only on position. Suppose 
the experimental physicists down the hall have built an apparatus that can carry out an 
ensemble measurement of Q(x). Our job is to calculate from the state function, which in 
this scenario we’ve already obtained by solving the Schrodinger equation (Chap. 6), the 
average value that the folks down the hall ought to expect. To write down the expression 
for (Q(a;)) we return, once again, to the probability density and the Born interpretation. 

Consider a point xo in an infinitesimal element dx. The product of P(x 0 ,t)dx is 
the probability of detecting a particle in the interval dx at time t. Now, the value of 
Q(x) at this point is Q(x 0 ), so the probability of obtaining this value in the measurement 
of Q(x) is just P(xo,t)dx. That is, we can use the position probability density as the 
weighting factor in a calculation of the expectation value of any observable that depends 
only on position, to wit: 

r x \ 

(i Q(x )) = / f*(a :,t)Q(x)^{x,t)dx. (3.44) 

J — OO 

Note carefully that this simple generalization does not apply to an observable that depends 
on both position and momentum. 


82 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



The Uncertainty 


The other statistical quantity we use in quantum physics is the standard deviation of 
an observable —otherwise known as its uncertainty. For a position measurement, the 
uncertainty in x answers the question: in an ensemble measurement at time t of the 
position of a particle in state ^(x, t), what is the spread of individual results around the 
expectation value (x)? We reviewed the definition of the standard deviation in § 3.3. 
We can now adapt this definition to quantum states just as we did the definition of the 
mean. 

The standard deviation is the square root of the dispersion. According to the 
definition (3.25), this quantity, written here for position, is 

Ax = y/(Ax) 2 = [ ( (re - {x) ) 2 ) ] 1/2 . Position Uncertainty (3.45a) 


Unfortunately, this definition is easier to write down than to apply. 

Let’s ponder it in detail. Using our definitions for the expectation values, here are 
our instructions: 

1. calculate the expectation value of position, (x)\ 

2. form the function x — ( x ); 

3. square the function determined in step (2); 

4. calculate the expectation value of the result of step (3); 

5. take the square root of the resulting number. 

Mercifully, we don’t have to do all this every time we need to calculate an uncer¬ 
tainty. There is an easier way: use the simpler, more convenient, equivalent expression 


(As) 2 = (x 2 ) - (x) 2 


(3.45/?) 


This result lets us calculate the position uncertainty for a quantum state from the expec¬ 
tation values of x and of x 2 . The form of (x 2 ) follows from the generalization (3.44), 
viz., 


/ oo 

V*{x,t)x 2 'S’(x,t)dx. (3.46) 

■oo 

Much simpler, right? More good news: Eq. (3.45 b) leads to a host of other time-saving 
results. One of the most useful is: 


Ax = y/Ja?) if (x) = 0. (3.47) 

Question 3-5 

I hope it’s clear how Equation (3.45 h) simplifies the chore of figuring out uncertainties. 
This result is so important that you really ought to derive it. Do so. 


Example 3.5. The Position Uncertainty for a Microscopic Particle 

Let’s return one last time to the state function (3.41) at t = 0. Recall that in Example 3.4 
we evaluated the expectation value of position for this state and found that because the wave 
function is symmetric about x = 0, this quantity is zero. Now let’s calculate the uncertainty 
Ax. 

If we use Eq. (3.45/?) rather than the definition (3.45a), we need evaluate only one 
additional integral, the expectation value of x 2 : 


Sec. 3.6 Great Expectations (and Uncertainties) 83 




*oo 


(3.48) 


<* 2 > = 



x 2 e x 


dx. 


This integral isn’t particularly challenging. First we exploit the even parity of its integrand 
to rewrite it as 



2 f x 2 e dx. 

Jo 


Then, ploughing through our trusty integral tables (or Appendix I), we find 

r X 2 e - * 2 dx = 

Jo 4 


(3.49) 


(3.50) 


This gives (.r 2 ) = 1/2. We can now evaluate the position uncertainty for this state, 


/ I / 1 \ 1/4 2 

- for ^(rc,0) = J e~ x /2 . (3.51) 

Equation (3.51) answers the question left dangling at the end of Example 3.4: what is 
the nature of the ensemble that gave (x) = 0 for this state? Clearly it was not an ensemble 
all members of which exhibited the same value; had this been the case, all data points would 
have been the same and we’d have found Ax = 0. No, it was one in which the position 
of the particle was uncertain, and the quantity we have here calculated is a quantitative 
measure of that uncertainty. You can see this feature of the state in the snapshot of its wave 
function in Fig. 3.9. 




84 Chap. 3 


First Postulates 


Figure 3.9 (a) The state function 
considered in Examples 3.4 and 3.5. 

(b) The corresponding probability density. 



Just as in Eq. (3.44) we generalized the definition of ( x ) to an arbitrary observable 
that can be expressed as a function of x, so can we generalize the definition (3.45) of 
Ax to such an observable, viz., 

A Q(x) = [( (Q(x) - (Q{x))f >] 1/2 . (3.52) 

As you might guess, in actual calculations we usually implement the alternative expres¬ 
sion 

[AQ(x)l 2 = ([Q(x)] 2 )-(0(X)> 2 . (3.53) 

Expectation values and uncertainties are of paramount importance to the user of 
quantum mechanics. Once we have learned how to calculate state functions and how 
to represent observables that depend on position and momentum, we’ll be applying the 
definitions of this section over and over. So remember them. 


3.7 FINAL THOUGHTS: WHAT THE STATE FUNCTION ISN’T 

( v 

As if by magic, Postulates I and II have transformed de Broglie’s vague notion of 
a matter wave into a beautiful mathematical construct: the state function. The Born 
Interpretation of this function, the bulwark of quantum theory, defines the very character 
of that theory as intrinsically probabilistic, statistical—and limited. From state functions, 
we can calculate probabilities for various outcomes of measurements and such statistical 
quantities as the average value and the uncertainty. But nothing more. 

Even so simple a question as “Where is a particular electron” is beyond the purview 
of quantum mechanics. At most, a quantum physicist can determine the probability of 
finding one of an ensemble of electrons at a particular location, the mean value of the 
positions obtained in an ensemble measurement, the position where an electron is most 
likely to be found, and a rough measure of the size of the region where most of the 
electrons will appear. In this chapter we’ve begun to leam how to do such calculations. 

Other, more philosophical questions also are beyond quantum mechanics. For 
example, in this chapter I have talked a lot about # but have not addressed questions 
such as: what, precisely, is this function? Where does it exist? In ordinary, geometrical 
space, like an electromagnetic wave? And what is the nature of its connection to the 
material system whose state it represents? I’ve dodged such questions because they lie 
on the fringes of orthodox quantum theory, in the domain of speculations, rather than 
answers. But the human mind abhors a vacuum; we seem to need to relate important 
new ideas to familiar concepts, and nearly every newcomer to quantum mechanics must 
engage in the struggle to get rid of classically-based answers to these questions. 

Our tendency to draw on classical physics as we grope for an understanding of 
quantum theory is certainly understandable. We’re seduced by similarities. For example, 
the state function plays a role in quantum mechanics that is analogous to that played 
by the trajectory in classical mechanics: it is the basic mathematical element, the state 
descriptor, of the theory. But the identification must end with this analogue! A wave 
function is not a trajectory. My point, which you’ll hear me rant about again, is that at 
both the conceptual and the mathematical level, quantum mechanics is not just a funny¬ 
looking reformulation of classical physics. The two physical theories are fundamentally, 
physically different. 


Sec. 3.7 Final Thoughts 85 



Even words lead us astray. When thinking about a ‘‘wave function,” we naturally 
tend to envision a wave in the classical sense: an actual, extant, three-dimensional 
waveform that propagates and carries energy. To be sure, we know from Chap. 2 that to 
picture a microscopic particle as a wave is wrong. But what of the “wave functions” that 
represent states of these particles? They seem rather like classical waves, don’t they? 

They do—but they aren’t. Although the properties and behavior of quantum waves 
are familiar, these waves are totally unlike any you have ever studied. For example, 
unlike classical waves, quantum waves don’t carry energy. So it’s impossible to detect 
wave functions per se\ these bizarre entities manifest themselves only indirectly, through 
their influence on the behavior of quantum particles as they propagate through space. 
(This feature led Einstein to refer to quantum waves as “ghost waves.”) The foundation 
of your thinking about wave functions should be not the classical concept of a wave but 
rather the novel notion that state functions carry information —probabilistic and statistical 
information about how the particles whose states they represent would behave were their 
properties measured. 

Moreover, wave functions do not exist in space, at least not in the sense that 
classical waves exist. Consider space. The space in which we walk around, frolic, study 
quantum mechanics, and perform experiments is called !R 3 ; we specify locations in -ft 3 
by the values of three real numbers in an orthogonal coordinate system. 

Now consider a state function. Such a function is complex and so could not exist in 
$ft 3 , for only real numbers and functions exist in this space. Moreover, the state function 
for a many-particle system depends on several coordinates. How could a function such 
as ^(ri,r 2 ,f) exist in geometrical space? It’s nonsense to suggest that such a function 
exists, as does an electromagnetic wave, in a space of three spatial coordinates. 

The moral of these ruminations is that whatever ^ is, it’s not a conventional 
undulation in space, like an electric field. So where does this leave us in our quest to 
understand the reality behind the state function? Do wave functions really exist? Here 
is Wemer Heisenberg trying to answer this question: 

The probability wave ... [stands] in the middle between the idea of an event and the 
actual event, a strange kind of physical reality just in the middle between possibility 
and reality, [emphasis mine] 

Heisenberg’s answer is strange indeed, for it leaves us in a kind of metaphysical 
limbo without an experimental escape route. When we’re not looking at microscopic 
particles, they behave in ways that correspond to the classical wave model; yet, when 
we measure their properties, they behave like classical particles. The postulates of 
this chapter provide a way out of this logical conundrum: we assume that complex 
functions exist that are somehow associated with the states of a microscopic system. 
These functions carry probabilistic information about the outcomes of measurements of 
the observables of the system. Finally, they can interfere according to the Principle of 
Superposition—and therein lies the explanation of the observed behavior of quantum 
particles. 

As far as anyone knows, the behavior of all microscopic particles is governed by 
probability waves; every electron, proton, and neutron in every atom in every blob of 
matter in the universe (including your author) is guided by its state function. As Nick 
Herbert says in his Quantum Reality (Doubleday/Anchor Press, 1985): 

In each atom ... something seems smeared out to fill the atom, an indescribable 
something we call the “probability cloud,” “realm of positional possibilities,” “electron 


86 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



wave function,” or “quantumstuff ’ without really being very sure what we’re talking 
about. Whatever it is, though, the whole world is made of it. 

In our next chapter, we’ll take a close look at the “quantumstuff’ of the simplest imag¬ 
inable system: one particle in one dimension doing nothing. 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 
Basic Tools 

If you’ve read this far, surely you know that you’re going to need a good math¬ 
ematical handbook and a very good table of integrals. You need not, however, spend 
thousands of dollars on these basic tools. For essential mathematical data at a reasonable 
price, I recommend 

1. Fischbeck, H. J., and K. H. Fischbeck, Formulas, Facts, and Constants for Students and 
Professionals (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982) (available in paperback). 

2. Dwight, Herbert B., Tables of Integrals and Other Mathematical Data, 4th ed. (New York: 
Macmillan, 1961). This book also contains a very good set of integral tables. 

If you are willing to spend a little more—for a volume that you will use through¬ 
out your professional career—I can oblige. For my money, the ultimate mathematical 
handbook is 

3. Kom, G. A., and T. M. Korn, Mathematical Handbook for Scientists and Engineers, 2nd ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968). 

And the ultimate integral table is the truly awesome compendium 

4. Gradshteyn, I. S., and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, Corrected and 
Enlarged Edition (New York: Academic Press, 1980). 

Complex Variables 

Complex numbers and functions are an essential part of the language of quantum 
physics. As we have seen, the basic element of this theory is a complex function. 
Actually, you won’t need a sophisticated knowledge of these topics to cope with this 
book. (For example, neither residues nor complex integration appear herein.) And 
Appendix K contains a very brief survey for the initiated. For others, I recommend the 
sections on complex variables in the following texts (listed here in order of increasing 
complexity): 

5. Hildebrand, F. B., Advanced Calculus for Applications (Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Prentice 
Hall, 1962), Chap. 10, especially §10.1-10.3. 

6. Arfken, George, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 2nd ed. (New York: Academic Press, 
1970), Chap. 6, especially § 6.1. 

7. Cushing, James T., Applied Analytical Mathematics for Physical Scientists (New York: Wi¬ 
ley, 1975), Chap. 7. 

And for the enthusiast, I recommend the following books that are devoted exclusively to 
complex variables: 

8. Kyrala, A., Applied Functions of a Complex Variable (New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1972). 
This book contains a particularly valuable set of worked examples. 

9. Churchill, Ruel V., Complex Variables and Applications, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1960). 


Annotated Selected Readings 87 



Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics 

The endlessly provocative question of the meaning of the state function, which I 
lighted on briefly in § 3.7, has been argued in a rather intimidating number of works— 
some of them highly controversial. In addition to the popular-level books recommended 
in Chap. 2,1 strongly advise the curious reader to dig up a copy of these items: 

10. Jammer, Max, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics: The Interpretations of Quantum 
Mechanics in Historical Perspective (New York: Wiley, 1974). This fascinating and largely 
readable book is a clear survey of the controversy surrounding the meaning of the state 
function. 

11. Belinfante, F. J., Measurement and Time Reversal in Objective Quantum Theory (New York: 
Pergamon, 1975). Nowhere near as intimidating as its title, this little volume—which is 
available in softcover at a reasonable price—contains a particularly useful analysis of the 
probability interpretation (§ 1) and a section provocatively entitled “Quantum Mechanics 
and God.” 

12. DeWitt, Bryce S., and R. Neill Graham, eds., The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum 
Mechanics (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1973). Much of this (paperback) 
book consists of reprints of classic papers on this, the principle alternative to the Copenhagen 
interpretation. Many of these may be beyond most readers of this book. But at least Bryce 
DeWitt’s “Quantum Mechanics and Reality” should be accessible to you, and the whole 
volume is a worthwhile and fairly inexpensive addition to your library. 

Among the plethora of papers on the interpretation of quantum physics, I particu¬ 
larly want to encourage you to peruse the following: 

13. Epstein, Paul S., “The Reality Problem in Quantum Mechanics” Amer. Jour. Phys. 13, 127 
(1945). 

14. Lande, Alfred, “Quantum Fact and Fiction” Amer. Jour. Phys. 33, 123 (1965). 

15. Shimony, Abner, “ Role of the Observer in Quantum Theory” Amer. Jour. Phys. 31, 755 
(1963). 

Max Born has written several fascinating and lucid books on quantum theory and 
its interpretation. Especially recommended are 

16. Causality and Chance in Modern Physics (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1957), 
and Born’s autobiographical reflections 

17. My Life and Views (New York: Scribners, 1958). 

Born and Einstein argued at fascinating length over these matters, and you can find 
their correspondence in 

18. The Born-Einstein Letters (New York: Walker and Company, 1971). 

Finally, an invaluable guide to further reading on this subject is 

19. DeWitt, Bryce S., and R. Neill Graham, “Resource Letter IQM-1 on the Interpretation of 
Quantum Mechanics” Amer. Jour. Phys. 39, 724 (1971). 

Alternative Postulations 

One’s choice of the postulates upon which one erects quantum mechanics is, to 
some extent, flexible. The graduate (and many of the undergraduate) texts in the Bibli¬ 
ography at the end of this book illustrate this point, but you may want to consider one of 
the following books. Both adopt a more formal approach to quantum theory than mine 
but write at the same level. And both are filled with valuable insights: 

20. Gillespie, Daniel T., A Quantum Mechanics Primer (London: International Textbook, 1973). 
An exceptionally clear text, albeit limited in scope. What Gillespie covers, he covers very 
well. 


88 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



21. Liboff, Richard L., Introductory Quantum Mechanics (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1980); 
see especially Liboff’s discussion in Chap. 3. 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


If all else fails, 

immortality can always be assured 
by spectacular error. 

—John Kenneth Galbraith 


Exercises 

3.1 On the Interpretation of the State Function: Short-Answer Questions 

Fig. 3.1.1 is a graph of the normalized state function and corresponding probability density 
for a quantum state of a single particle in one dimension at t = 0. The magnitude |^(®,0)| 
of the wave function continues to decay smoothly to zero as x -* ±oo. 



Figure 3.1.1 A sample state function and its probability density. 


(a) Is this function physically admissible? Why or why not? 

(b) In an ensemble measurement of the position of the particle in this state, where is the 
particle most likely to be found? 

(c) Is the expectation value of position in this state equal to your answer to (b)? less than 
your answer? greater than your answer? Explain your reasoning carefully and fully. 

(d) Is the uncertainty in momentum of this state equal to zero? Justify your answer. 


Exercises and Problems 89 




3.2 A Probable-Position Problem 

Consider a particle of mass m in a one-dimensional infinite square well, i.e., whose potential 
energy is the one in Fig. 3.6a. Suppose that the system is in a quantum state represented by 
the normalized wave function of the ground state (the state of minimum allowed total energy): 


*>(*•*) = ^1 cos [-\l<x<+\l] 

where w is a constant. 

(a) Determine an expression for the probability density of the ground state at time t. Discuss 
carefully and fully the physical interpretation of this quantity. 

(b) At time t = 0, we perforin an ensemble measurement of the position of the particle. 
Evaluate the probability that in this measurement we will find the particle in the right 
half of the well— i.e., in the finite interval [0, L/2], 

(c) Compare your answer to part (b) with the predictions of classical physics for the proba¬ 
bility of detecting a macroscopic particle of mass M in the right half of the well. 

Hint: What is the classical probability density for a free particle? 

3.3 Measurement in Quantum Mechanics: Short-Answer Questions 

Consider a system whose state function ^{x,t) at a fixed time t 0 is shown in Fig. 3.3.1. 



Figure 3.3.1 


(a) Describe how you would calculate the expectation value of position for this state from 
the functional form of ^(x, t). 

(b) What is the value of ensemble average of position for this state at time to? 

(c) Describe briefly how you would calculate the position uncertainty for this state from 

(d) Is Ax zero, positive-but-finite, or infinite? Why? 

(e) Is the momentum uncertainty A p zero, positive but finite, or infinite? Why? 

(f) Can this state function be nonnalized? If not, why not? If so, describe briefly how you 
would normalize \&(x,t). 

3.4 More on the Interpretation of the State Function 
Consider the state function shown in Figure 3.4.1. 



90 Chap. 3 First Postulates 



(a) Answer parts (a)-(d) of Exercise 3.1 for this function. 

(b) Draw a rough sketch of the position probability density for this state. 

(c) Discuss carefully the physical significance for a position measurement of the presence of 
the node in the state function at x = 0. 


Problems 

3.1 Fun with Probabilities 

(a) Preparing for a Thanksgiving trip to Las Vegas, an enterprising student decides to study 
the likelihood of his becoming fantastically wealthy playing dice. Let s denote the 
number of spots shown by a (six-sided) die thrown at random. (Assume the unlikely 
idealization of an honest casino—no loaded dice.) 

(1) Calculate the average result of an ensemble measurement of s. 

(2) Calculate the standard deviation of the results of this study. 

(b) A zoology graduate student has conned his thesis advisor into letting him do a dissertation 
on the distribution of hairs in a rare species of gnu. Prior to leaving for gnu country in 
the Kalahari, he finds in the library an earlier research study on this fascinating topic that 
found that the number of hairs on this species can only be the integer Ne = 2 l , where t 
is any non-negative integer. Moreover, the probability of finding an animal with N* hairs 
has been found to be e -1 /(£!). Worried that this might be bad gnus, he investigates 
further: 

(1) Evaluate and interpret the ensemble average (N). 

(2) Evaluate and interpret the standard deviation, AN. 

3.2 Exploring the States of a Simple Quantum System 

In this problem, we’ll try to gain familiarity with several important new quantities introduced 
in Chap. 3 by considering three states of an extremely simple system: the particle in an infinite 
square well. This system consists of a particle of mass m in one dimension with potential 


V(x) 


oo x < — -L 

n 1 _ 1 _ 
0 --L < x < -L\ 

oo x > ^L. 


Here are three physically admissible state functions for this system (which we’ll derive in 
Chap. 7): 


(x,£) = JVicos(7r|) e - iElt/h 
v 2 (x } t) = Ar 2 sin(27r|) e ~ iE ^/ h 

^(.T,t) = jV[cOS^7T^r^ e ~ tE l l / h q. s i n ^27T^r^ 


ground state 
first excited state 
another state 


All state functions are zero outside the box. In these expressions, Ni, N 2 , and N are 
normalization constants, and E\ and E 2 are the energies of the ground and first excited 
states, respectively. As we’ll discover in Chap. 7, these energies are given by 


Exercises and Problems 91 



E n — ft 


ir 2 h 2 
2 mb' 1 


for n = 1,2,.... 


Notice that the third state, the one represented by is a superposition of those repre¬ 

sented by the other two wave functions. 

(a) Normalize each of these state functions. 

(b) For each of these three wave functions, answer the following questions concerning the 
results of an ensemble measurement of position that is performed at some time t > 0: 

(1) What average value of x will be obtained? (If your answer is time-dependent, write 
the time dependence as a real function of time.) 

(2) Is your answer to (bl) equal to the most probable position for and ^ 2 ? Why 
or why not? 

(3) Does your answer to (bl) depend on time? 

(c) Evaluate the uncertainty in position for the ground and first excited states. 

(d) Sketch carefully the real part of ^( x,t ) for two times, t = 0 and t = 2mL 2 /{3nh). 
Using your sketches, explain the behavior of (x) for this state as time passes (as found 
in part (b3) above). Plot these functions in terms of f . [Choose a convenient (but 
reasonable) value for L if you wish.] 

3.3 Deducing Information from State Functions without Work: I 

To actually solve for the state functions of a quantum mechanical system requires a fair bit of 
mathematical acuity—we must solve the time-dependent Schrodinger equation (3.39), a task 
we shall spend most of this book mastering. It is possible, however, to deduce lots of important 
physical information from such state functions without solving complicated equations provided 
you understand the meaning of the quantum mechanical quantities involved. In this problem 
(and the next) we shall do this for a couple of simple and important systems. 

In Fig. 3.3.1 you’ll find a graph of wave functions for four quantum states of a particle 
of mass m in one dimension with a simple harmonic oscillator potential energy 

V(x) = ^rnulx 2 , (3.3.1) 

where w 0 is the natural frequency of the oscillator. These special stationary states have 
several unusual properties; they are the subject of Chap. 7. Of immediate relevance is that the 
energy of a stationary state has a well-defined value. That is,/or a stationary state A E(t) = 0 
for all times t. 



Figure 3.3.1 Snapshots of the first four stationary states of a one-dimensional simple harmonic 
oscillator at t = 0. 


We’ll denote the stationary-state wave functions of the one-dimensional simple harmonic 
oscillator by ty n (x t t), where n is an index that tells us the energy of the state: n = 0 is the 
ground state (the state of minimum energy), n = 1 the first excited state , and so forth. The 
energies of these states are 


92 Chap. 3 First Postulates 


(a) Sketch the probability densities P n (z, 0 ) for the four stationary states whose wave func¬ 
tions are shown in Fig. 3.3.1. (Be careful to show correctly the relative magnitude of 
the peak heights of these functions.) 

(b) By extrapolating from the shapes of the wave functions in Fig. 3.3.1, sketch the wave 
function for \|> 4 (a;,0) and the corresponding probability density P 4 (x, 0). 

(c) What is the mean value of position (x) n (at time t = 0) for these four stationary states? 
Think, don’t calculate. Support your answer with an argument using words and pictures, 
but no equations. 

(d) The state functions for the first two of the states shown in Fig. 3.3.1 can be conveniently 
expressed in terms of the constant 


They are 



(3.3.3) 


Vo(x,0) = e 02x2/2 (3.3.4a) 

/ o 2 \ i/4 

*i(s.0)=[ —) ^(Px)e~ 02 * 2/2 . (3.3.4/;) 

y 7r j 


Using the definition of the ensemble average of position, support your answer to part (c) by 
graphing the integrands of ( x) 0 and (x) r 

(e) What mathematical property of the state functions ^(x.O), explains your answer to 
part (c)? Assume that this property holds for all stationary state wave functions of the 
simple harmonic oscillator potential (we’ll verify this assumption in Chap. 8 ). Now, 
guess the mean value of position (x) n for any stationary state of this system. 

3.4 More Deductions from Simple Wave Functions 

A particularly simple collection of wave functions are those for a particle in an infinite square 
well. Let’s consider the first four of these functions, ^„(x,0) for n= 1, 2, 3, and 4. Assume 
that the width of the potential well is L. Like the states of the simple harmonic oscillator in 
the previous problem, these states are stationary, with (well-defined) energies. For the infinite 
square well, these energies are 


TT 2 h 2 

E n = n 2 for n= 1,2,3,... (3.4.1) 

In Chap. 7 we’ll derive the explicit mathematical forms for the stationary-state wave functions. 
For the first two, we’ll find 


'MM) = COs(tf^) e- iE ' ,/h 

(3.4.2) 

MM) = \[i sin ( 2lT l) e -,E2,/fi 

(3.4.3) 


(a) By thinking about the symmetry of the infinite square well and the above expressions for 
^ i (re, 0) and ^ 2 (x,0), guess the mathematical form of # 3 ( 3 ;, 0). (You need not worry 
about the normalization constant N :i , although you probably can guess this too.) 

(b) Sketch ^ 5 (x,0) and the corresponding probability density. 

(c) What is ( x) lt for n = 1, 2, ...» 5? (Think, don’t calculate.) Extrapolate your answer 
to arbitrary n, providing a justification in words and pictures (but not equations). 

Hint: Try graphing the integrands of (x) t and (x) 2 . 


Exercises and Problems 93 



(d) Notice that the stationary-state wave functions alternate parity with increasing n — i.e., 

the ground state (n = 1) is an even function ofx, the first excited state (n = 2) is an odd 
function ofx, the second excited state (n = 3) is even, and so forth. Does this property 
of have any effect on the expectation value (a;) fl ? Does it have any effect on 

the position uncertainty (Ax) u for these states? Explain why or why not. 

(e) Do you expect (Arc),, to be independent of n? Justify your answer, preferably with 
sketches. 

(f) For a stationary state do the expectation value (x) u and the uncertainty (Ax)„ 

depend on time? Justify your answer. 

3.5 The Classical Limit is Not Necessarily Macroscopic 

Many students of quantum mechanics fall into the seductive trap of thinking that the only limit 
in which classical mechanics pertains to a system is that in which the size of the particle(s) 
in the system is large—the macroscopic limit. This is not always the case. In this problem, 
we shall begin to explore this point using the infinite square well discussed in several prior 
problems and our understanding of the basic quantum principles. (Note: You need not have 
worked the earlier problems on the infinite square well to solve this one, but you may need 
to use some of the results included in the statements of those problems.) 

(a) The wave function for the ground state of the infinite square well at t = 0 is 


»i(*,0) 



(3.5.1) 


This is the first of an infinite number of special states of this system, called stationary 
states, for which A E = 0. Evaluate the position uncertainty (Ai)i for this state at 
t = 0. 

(b) Sketch the probability density |^„(x, 0)| 2 for a stationary state with a very large energy: ; 
i.e., for n » 1. 

(c) Evaluate the position uncertainty (Ax)„ for n > 1. (Express your answer in terms 
of L.) 

Hint: Your sketch in (b) should suggest a nifty approximation that will greatly simplify the 
integral you need to evaluate in (c). 

(d) Compare your answer to (c) with the classical standard deviation of position— i.e., the 
value you would get for a macroscopic particle in an infinite square well of macroscopic 
width L. Do your answers to parts (b)-(d) depend on the mass m of the particle? What 
can you conclude from this problem about the classical limit of quantum mechanics? 

3.6 Exposing the Non-Classical Behavior of a Quantum Particle 

In Fig. 3.6.1 is shown the ground-state wave function ^i(x,0) for a particle of mass m in 
& finite potential well of strength Vo. The particle in this state has a well-defined energy 
E < 0 — i.e., the energy in this state is certain and (AE)i = 0. 

If you look carefully at ^(rc.O), you will note that the position probability amplitude for 
this state is non-zero in the classically-forbidden regions x > L/2 and x < —L/2. In such 
a region, E < V, so T = E - V <0:a “classically-forbidden” situation. In Chap. 8 we’ll 
solve for these wave functions and will see why they are non-zero in classically-forbidden 
regions. In this problem, we shall explore some ramifications of this fact from the vantage 
point of the key ideas of quantum physics. 

Suppose we set out to detect experimentally particles in a classically-forbidden region. 
How might we do this? We could use a photon microscope, scattering photons from the 
particle. Of course, we must be sure that the particle from which the photon scatters is 
actually in a classically-forbidden region, i.e., that is not at some x < L/2 or x > -L/2. For 
simplicity, let’s concentrate in this problem on the right-hand classically forbidden region, 
x > L/2. 


94 Chap. 3 First Postulates 


W*)| 



i (a) 






0 

|*o 

X 


L 



2 

(b) 


Figure 3.6.1 (a). A finite square well 
potential energy. In this problem we 
consider the ground-state of a particle of 
mass m with this potential energy, (b). The 
wave function at t = 0 for this state. 


First we need to define this region more precisely. Looking at Fig. 3.6.1, we notice that 
the wave function decays exponentially in the classically-forbidden region. In fact, as we’ll 
learn in Chap. 8, the form of the wave function in this region is 

= Be~ KX } (3.6.1) 

x> L /2 

where the constant k is defined as 



'2m(—E). 


(3.6.2) 


To avoid having to worry about the minus sign on the energy, which results from our choice 
of the top of the well in Fig. 3.6.1 as the zero of energy, we’ll introduce the binding energy 
£, which is defined as 


whence k can be written 



(3.6.3) 


K 



(3.6.4) 


Now, taking a clue from optics, let’s define the classically forbidden region as [L/2,x* 0 ], 
where x* 0 is defined as the position where the probability density is 1/e of its maximum value 
in this region, 


P{* o,0) = JP(f, 0). (3.6.5) 

(The total internal reflection of light at a glass-to-air interface behaves in a fashion analogous 
to the probability density in this problem.) 

(a) To guarantee that we detect particles that are in the classical-forbidden region, we require 
that the position uncertainty be no greater than the size of this region, i.e.. 

Ax* < x 0 - f. (3.6.6) 


Exercises and Problems 95 






What is the resulting uncertainty in the (a* component of) momentum p of the particle? 

(b) If p is uncertain, then we cannot know the precise value of the kinetic energy K of the 
particle. What is the uncertainty A K in this quantity? 

(c) Now, suppose we find a particle in the classically-forbidden region. Can we know that 
its kinetic energy is negative? Explain how the uncertainty principle and wave-particle 
duality conspire in this measurement to resolve the apparent paradox of a negative kinetic 
energy particle. 

(d) Two students, pondering the state function shown in Fig. 3.6.1, comment as follows: 

Student A: “A quantum particle in the classically-forbidden region has a negative 
kinetic energy.” 

Student B: “There is a finite probability of detecting the particle in the classically- 
forbidden region.” 

Is either of these statements correct? If not, discuss the logical error in the thinking of 
the student(s) who is (are) wrong. 

Hint: What condition must we place on the intensity of the photon beam used to illuminate 
the classically-forbidden region if we are to detect an electron inside this region? Thinking 
about this question should lead you to an upper limit on the wavelength of the photon we can 
use in this experiment and hence to a conclusion very much like that of part [c]. 


96 Chap. 3 


First Postulates 



CHAPTER 4 

An Illustrative Interlude 

Wave Packets in One Dimension 


4.1 

4.2 

4.3 
* 4.4 

4.5 

4.6 

4.7 

4.8 


On the Nature of the Free-Particle State Function 
Wave Packet Construction for Fun and Profit 
The Amplitude Function 
Fourier Analysis (A Mathematical Detour) 

An Extended Example: The Gaussian Wave Packet 

Unmasked 

Uncertainty Regained 

(Not Quite) All About Momentum 

Final Thoughts: A Wealth of Representations 



I dare say that’s an idea which 
has already occurred to you, 
but with the weight of my great mind 
behind it, no doubt it strikes 
the imagination more forcibly. 

—Lord Peter Wimsey 
in Strong Poison 
by Dorothy L. Sayers 


Postulates I and II are the first bricks in the foundation of quantum mechanics. The 
first postulate identifies the basic element of the theory: the wave function. The second 
postulate interprets this function as a position probability amplitude. As befits the intro¬ 
duction, the discussion in Chap. 3 was general and rather abstract. So in this chapter, 
we’ll take a breather from this development to explore at length a single, simple example: 
a microscopic free particle in one dimension. The physics of this system is especially 
simple because, as its name implies, such a particle is free of external forces or fields. 1 

Aside: Free Particles in the Real World. A free particle is, of course, an idealiza¬ 
tion; no system is truly isolated from external influences. Nevertheless, the example 
of this chapter finds wide application in quantum physics. The reason is that in many 
situations, the external forces that do act on a particle are so weak that we can ne¬ 
glect them. For example, in electron scattering experiments physicists use a beam of 
non-interacting electrons. Such a beam is, of course, subject to the force of gravity. 

But we need not take this force into account in a description of its physics, because 
the effect of this very weak force on the particles in the beam is negligible. 

Our objective in this chapter is the wave function 'I'(a;, t) of a free particle in one 
dimension. Ordinarily, we would obtain this function by mathematical machinations— 
we’d solve the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation [Eq. (3.39)], 


h 1 d 2 

2 mdx 2 


+ V(s) 


= ih— 


(4.1) 


Since a free particle experiences no external forces, its potential energy is a constant the 
value of which I’ll set equal to zero: 2 


V(a;)=0 [for a free particle]. (4.2) 

So the Schrodinger Equation for a free particle is just (4.1) without the term in V(x). 

At this stage in our study, I want to avoid the algebraic chore of solving this second- 
order partial differential equation—even for so simple a system as the free particle. 
Instead, I want to lead you to a deeper understanding of the nature of wave functions. 
So our strategy (in § 4.1 and 4.2) will be to deduce rather than derive the state function 
for a free particle. 

What we will find is that this function must be a complex wave packet. Wave 
packets play an important role in quantum mechanics, so we’ll spend a little time (in 


X A classical analogue of a free particle in one dimension is a macroscopic bead constrained to move 
along a (hypothetical) infinite, frictionless wire. 

2 Recall that the potential energy of a system is arbitrary to within an additive constant, since only 
potential differences are measurable. See Chap. 8 of Fundamentals of Physics, 2nd ed., by D. Halliday and R. 
Resnick (New York: Wiley, 1981). 


98 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



§ 4.2-4A) examining the mathematics of their construction via Fourier analysis. But, 
as always, physics remains paramount, and in § 4.5 we’ll discover uncertainty in the 
representation of a state by a wave packet. Finally, in § 4.6-4.7, we’ll see a tantalizing 
glimpse of how to extract information about observables other than position from a wave 
function. This analysis will hurtle us into Chap. 5, where we tackle momentum. 


4.1 ON THE NATURE OF THE FREE-PARTICLE STATE 
FUNCTION 


Always trust the simplest explanation that fits all the facts 
unless there’s a damn good reason not to do so. 

— Dr. Stuart Hay 
in Incarnate 
by Ramsey Campbell 


What do we know about state functions? In particular, what properties should character¬ 
ize the state functions of a particle in one dimension? Well, in § 3.5 I argued that such a 
function must be single-valued, continuous, and—most importantly—normalizable. That 
is, it must obey the boundary condition (3.29), according to which ^(a;, t) must go to zero 
(as \x\ -> oo) rapidly enough that its normalization integral 'H*(x } t)'V(x,t)dx is 
finite. Physically, this condition means that the wave function must be spatially localized. 
That’s one property. 

Another is evident from the Schrodinger Equation (4.1): ^(z,*) must be complex. 
Here’s why: the right-hand side of this equation has a multiplicative factor of i = </-F 
that is absent from the left-hand side. Therefore no purely real or purely imaginary 
function can satisfy this equation. Were $(z,£) purely real, for example, then the left- 
hand side would be real and the right-hand side would be imaginary—which would 
violate the equal sign! 3 

These two properties pertain to the state functions of any system. When we turn to 
the free particle (or any other isolated system ) we find a third, quite different property: 
a fundamental symmetry of nature called the homogeneity of free space. I want to tell 
you about this property, which is the topic of the next subsection, to introduce you to 
the power and beauty of symmetry arguments. From this symmetry property of space 
itself, we’ll derive a condition on the probability density P = |#| 2 that all free-particle 
state functions must satisfy. Then we’ll use this property—and a little imagination and 
logic—to deduce the wave function for the free particle in one dimension. 


The Homogeneity of Free Space 


What’s the first step we must take if we want to investigate the physics of a system, 
be it microscopic or macroscopic? We must define a reference frame. The one you’re 
probably most familiar with is the rectangular (or Cartesian) coordinate system shown in 

3 This argument does not imply that ^(.t, t) must be complex at all times; it can be real (or imaginary) 
at certain, discrete times. But it does imply that the wave function cannot be purely real or imaginary at all 
times. 


Sec. 4.1 On the Nature of the Free-Particle State Function 99 



Fig. 4.1. The directions of the three mutually orthogonal axes that define this reference 
frame are e x , e y , and e z . 4 These axes intersect at the origin O. 




Figure 4.1 A Cartesian coordinate 
system. Within this system several sets 
of orthogonal coordinates can be used, 
among them rectangular and spherical 
coordinates. 


The decision of where to put the origin of coordinates is very important, because 
all vectors are referred to this point. But the choice of origin is ours to make. After all, 
coordinates and reference frames are just mathematical artifices that physicists invent to 
solve problems. 

A Historical Aside. This feature of theoretical physics was noted in 1885 in an 
essay by Charles Howard Hinton (1853-1907): 

To measure, we must begin somewhere, but in space there is no 
“somewhere” marked out for us to begin at. This measuring is some¬ 
thing, after all, foreign to space, introduced by us for our convenience. 

And as to dimensions, in order to enumerate and realize the dif¬ 
ferent dimensions, we must fix on a particular line to begin with, and 
then draw other lines at right angles to this one. 

But the first straight line we take can be drawn in an infinite 
number of directions. Why should we take any particular one? 

If we take any particular line, we do something arbitrary, of our 
own will and decision, not given to us naturally by space. 

Hinton’s comments lead us to expect physically measurable properties to be indepen¬ 
dent of such arbitrary choices. And, indeed, they are. 5 

In practice we have several ways to pick the origin of coordinates. We might 
choose an origin that will simplify the solution of whatever equations we confront. Or 
we might select as the origin the location of a measuring apparatus. But most often we 
look to nature for guidance. For example, we might identify some physical entity—say, 
a (point) particle in the system or the source of an electromagnetic field—as the origin. 

But if the particle is free, then we cannot use the latter gambit, for nothing in free 
space distinguishes one point over another. That is, nature does not identify a preferred 
origin for a free particle. In this case we can put O anywhere we wish. 

4 Little hats do a lot of work in quantum mechanics. Throughout this book, a little hat on an e, such as 
e t , will denote a unit vector in the i direction. (For rectangular coordinates, i = x,y,z.) But from Chap. 5 
onward, little hats on other symbols will denote operators. Be wary. 

5 Hinton was so interesting a character that I can’t resist telling you a little about him. Many consider 
him one of the great philosophers of hyperspace; he was fascinated by the fourth dimension. No, fascinated is 
the wrong word; Hinton was obsessed. In an effort to construct a mental image of a four-dimensional universe, 
he memorized 46,656 one-inch cubes, each of which had been assigned a Latin name. Evidently, this daunting 
task was not challenging enough for Hinton, who next decided to leam his cubic yard of cubes in each of its 
twenty-four possible orientations. For more on this eccentric but brilliant mathematician, see Rudy Rucker’s 
delightful book. The Fourth Dimension: Toward a Geometry of Higher Reality (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 
1984). 


100 


Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 




This discussion of the origin of coordinates leads us to the fundamental symmetry I 
property I mentioned above: the homogeneity of free space. When we say "free space 1 
is homogeneous ” we mean that the physical properties of a system in free space are 
I independent of the origin of coordinates. The implications of homogeneity for a physical j 

I theory (such as quantum mechanics) are strict indeed: j 



Rule 

All physical quantities we calculate must be independent of the origin of coordinates. 


You can see what this means if you imagine picking up the system and translating it 
through space to a new location. According to this rule, all measurable quantities that 
you calculate from a state descriptor of the system after translation must equal those 
calculated from the corresponding state descriptor before translation. 

Since in quantum mechanics we calculate properties from wave functions, it should 
come as no surprise that the homogeneity requirement imposes a limitation on wave 
functions. But be careful—the nature of this limitation is rather subtle. Homogeneity 
| does not imply that the state function itself must be independent of the coordinate origin, I 
I because this function is not measurable. But all measurable quantities are calculated / 
/ from the probability density so the homogeneity of free space demands that the ( 

I probability density be independent of the origin of coordinates. That is, a translation 
of a microscopic free particle must not alter its probability density. Such a translation 
appears in Fig. 4.2. 





Figure 4.2 The effect on the probability density of the translation of a microscopic 
system by a distance a in the +x direction/ The state function of the system is changed 
by the translation and so depends on a. But the probability density must be unchanged; 
i.e., it must be independent of a. 


To use this property to deduce the free-particle state function, we’ll need a mathe¬ 
matical expression of it. So let’s consider translating a system that before translation is 
in a quantum state represented by S'. The state function after translation will, in general, 
be some other function of position and time. (We’ll assume instantaneous translation, 
so t does not change.) This function will also depend on the translation distance a. So 
I’ll represent the state after translation by 4^. Now, the relationship between the state 
functions of a one-dimensional system before and after translation in the x direction is 
simply 

t) = — a, t) [for translation by a in the -fa; direction]. (4.3) 

With this notation we can easily write down the homogeneity requirement that the prob¬ 
ability densities before and after translation be equal, viz., 


Sec. 4.1 On the Nature of the Free-Particle State Function 101 




(4.4) 


homogeneity of free space =J> |^[,| 2 = |^| 2 


We are now ready to tackle the problem of the free particle. But before we begin, let’s 
summarize the properties that the state function of such a particle must obey: 

1 . must be spatially localized (normalizable); 

2 . d/ must be a complex function of position and time; 

3. ^ must not violate the homogeneity of free space. 

‘ I 

Homogeneity and the Free-Partide State Function 


To show you how to use the homogeneity requirement (4.4) to check out prospective 
free-particle state functions, I’ll try one that we know is wrong. Consider a free particle 
in a state with momentum p and energy E. 6 

According to the de Broglie relations (2.16), the wave characteristics of particles 
in such a state are the associated wavelength A = h/p and frequency u = E/h, where h 
is Planck’s constant. These relations suggest a guess at the wave function of the particle: 
a real harmonic wave with this wavelength and frequency: 


/(re, t) = A cos (x 3 ' — 27 ti4 + a) . real harmonic wave (4.5) 


In this generic harmonic wave, the amplitude A and phase constant a are real numbers 
that, in practice, are determined from the initial conditions on the problem. 7 In this 
section we are concerned only with the functional form of /(&,£), so for convenience 
I’ll set a = 0. 

Before proceeding to shoot down this guess, I want to get rid of the unsightly 
factors of 2ir littering Eq. (4.5). Harmonic waves are usually written in tenns of the 
wave number k and angular frequency tu, which are defined by 



CJ = 27 TV 


wave number 
angular frequency 


(4.6a) 
(4.6 b) 


The de Broglie relations specify the connection between these fellows and the momentum 
p and energy E of the state: 


p = hk (4.7a) 

E = hu, (4.7 b) 

where I’ve introduced the all-purpose 27r-absorber (otherwise known as the “rationalized 
Planck’s constant”) 

6 In nature, free-particle states in which energy and momentum can be known precisely don’t exist. 
Statistically speaking, we say that the uncertainties in the energy and momentum are positive for all states: 
AE > 0 and A p > 0. But states do exist in which the energy and momentum are very nearly certain (/>., 
these uncertainties are very small), and we often approximate such a state by a function with a well-defined 
E and p. 

7 The initial conditions on /(x, t) are just its values at a particular position and time, usually at x = 0 
and t = 0. VVe can choose the phase constant a to force the general form (4.5) to agree with any initial 
conditions. If, for example, /(0,0) = A, we choose a = 0. If, on the other hand, /(0,0) = 0, we choose 
a = 37r/2. The latter often-used choice, by the way, transforms the cosine function into a sine function, so 
that the function becomes f(x , t) = A sin(A:x — lot). And so forth. 


102 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 




(4.8) 



In its new clothes, our guess (4.5) for a free-particle state function looks like 

= A cos(kx - cot). (4.9) 

This function is sketched in Fig. 4.3. 


t(x, 0) 


vwvvwwv 


(a) 


I *(x, 0) | 2 


WWWVAaAAAAAA/ 


(b) 


Figure 4.3 (a) The real harmonic wave 
of Eq. (4.9) at t = 0, and (b) its square. 
This function oscillates throughout space, 
^ as suggested by the dotted lines at the 
x fringes of these curves. Consequently it 
cannot be normalized and is not physically 
admissible. 


Aside: The Dispersion Relation. You probably remember from your study of waves 
that the angular frequency u> and the wave number k are related via a dispersion 
relation. In quantum mechanics, we can determine the dispersion relation from the 
relationship between the total energy and the momentum. For example, the energy 
of a free particle is purely kinetic, so provided its velocity is non-relativistic (v < c), 
the total energy E is related to the linear momentum p by the simple fonnula 

7-i p 2 

E = —. [for a non-relativistic free particle] (4.10a) 


Translating this into a dispersion relation via the definitions (4.7), we get 8 

w(k) = ■ dispersion relation for a free particle (4.10/?) 


Now we all know why Eq. (4.9) won’t do. First, we can see from Fig. 4.3 that for 
this guess the normalization integral—the area under the probability density curve—is 
infinite, so this function can’t be normalized. Moreover, it’s not complex and so couldn’t 


8 If the particle is traveling at relativistic velocities, the total energy (including the rest-mass energy) 
and the linear momentum are related by Eq. (2.14), so (4.106) is not applicable. For such a particle of rest 
mass mo, the dispersion relation is 


w(*r) 



Sec. 4.1 On the Nature of the Free-Particle State Function 103 




satisfy the Schrodinger equation (4.1). But I want to show you yet another reason it 
won’t work: it violates the homogeneity requirement. 

Example 4.1. The Real Harmonic Wave and the Homogeneity Requirement 

The demonstration is easy: we just determine the probability densities of the state (4.9) 
before and after translation and see if they’re the same. Before translation, the probability 
is just the squared modulus of the function (4.9), 

P{x,t) = A 2 cos 2 (kx - ut). (4.11) 

After translation, the wave function is given [a la Eq. (4.3)] by 

(4.12fl) 


(4.12&) 


’J'aC'Ej t) = A cos[fc(x - a) - ut], 

^O which we can expand (using the handy trig identities in Appendix H) into 

(®> t) = A [cos(A;x — ut) cos ka + sin(kx — ut) sin ka). 


So the probability density after translation is 

^>a(x,t) $«(£,£) = A 2 cos 2 (kx - ut) cos 2 ka 

+ A 2 [sin 2 (A:x - cut) sin 2 ka + 2cosfcasin A:acos(A;x — iot)sin(kx — cut)]. (4.13) 

Now look carefully at the first term in (4.13). Compare it to (4.11). See? The first of the 
three terms in the probability density after translation is P(x , t) cos 2 ka, the product of the 
probability density before translation and an additional factor! This result proves that a real 
harmonic wave, in addition to its other faults, violates the homogeneity requirement: 


Pa{x,t) # P{x, t). [for a real harmonic wave]. (4.14) 

This fact alone is enough to invalidate this function as a state descriptor for a free particle, 
for it is inconsistent with a fundamental symmetry property of nature itself. Back to the 
drawing board. 


Question 4-1 

As you probably know, any real function can be decomposed into a series of sine and cosine 
functions. Using this fact, present a brief argument that no real function of x and t can 
satisfy the homogeneity requirement. 


Question 4-2 

Show that the linear combination of plane harmonic waves 


^(x, t) = cos (kx - ut) + i sin(A;x - ut) 


(4.15) 


does satisfy the homogeneity requirement. 


A Second Guess: The Complex Harmonic Wave 

Of the three defects of the real harmonic wave, the easiest to repair is its real character. 
A simple complex function that we might nominate as a candidate for the representative 
of a free-particle state with well-defined energy and momentum is the generalization 
suggested by Question 4-2: a complex harmonic wave of the form 


104 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



complex harmonic wave 


(4.16) 


tf(M) = Ae i{kx - Ut \ 

where, as in the real harmonic wave, the frequency and wave number are related by the 
free-particle dispersion relation 9 u(k) = hk 2 j2m. Now let’s see if this guess satisfies 
the demanding homogeneity requirement. 

Example 4.2. The Complex Harmonic Wave and the Homogeneity Requirement 
The state function (4.16) after translation is 

= .4 *'<**-*—*> (4.17a) 

= e-‘- •>] (4.176) 

= (4.17c) 

I hope you’re way ahead of me by now. According to (4.17c), the state function after 
translation is identical to that before translation except for the multiplicative factor e~ ika . 
So the state function depends on the origin of coordinates only through this exponential 
factor. [Notice that since ka is a constant, this is just a global phase factor (§ 3.5).] When 
we form the probability density after translation, this factor obligingly goes away: 

^(a. *)*!,(*»*) =e Ua ^*(a;,<)e _ifca ^(x,t) (4.18a) 

=(4.186) 

So the probability density formed from a complex harmonic wave is unchanged by a trans¬ 
lation. We conclude that such a wave does satisfy the homogeneity requirement (4.4). It 
also satisfies another of our properties: it’s complex. That’s two out of three. Now, what’s 
wrong with it? 

Question 4-3 

Verify that the complex harmonic wave (4.16) satisfies the time dependent Schrodinger 
Equation (4.1) for the free particle. 


On the Homs of a Dilemma 

Alas, the simple complex harmonic wave (4.16) is not spatially localized. This regrettable 
property is obvious from its probability density, which is constant : 

P{x y t) = t) = \A\ 2 . [for a complex harmonic wave], (4.19) 

A constant probability density implies that we’re equally likely to detect an electron 
anywhere in space. That is, the complex harmonic wave would represent a state in 
which we know nothing about the position of the particle; this observable is “infinitely 

9 Eq. (4.16) is the general form of a complex traveling wave that propagates in the +x direction. The 
corresponding form for a wave propagating in the -x direction is 

tf(®,t) = Ae-^ kx+ut K 

You may be familiar with such waves from your study of electricity and magnetism, where they are used to 
represent electric and magnetic fields. It is important to remember, however, that complex electromagnetic 
waves are just problem-solving tools; we ultimately must take the real parts of such functions, because only 
real electromagnetic waves exist in the laboratory. For more on complex functions in electromagnetic theory, 
see Chap. 8 of Introduction to Electrodynamics by David J. Griffiths (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall 
1981). 


Sec. 4.1 On the Nature of the Free-Particle State Function 105 



indeterminate” ( Ax = oo). So in no sense is a such a state spatially localized. Indeed, 
it’s hard even intuitively to see how we could associate such a wave with a particle. 

Question 4-4 

Is the infinite position uncertainty for the complex harmonic wave consistent with the Heisen¬ 
berg Uncertainty Principle? If so, why? If not, why not? 

The lack of spatial localization shows up in the normalization integral for the 
complex harmonic wave, which is infinite : 

f '&*(x,t)' i lf(x ) t)dx 
J — oo 

/ oo 

dx = oo. [for a complex harmonic wave]. (4.20) 

-oo 

We know from § 3.5 that we cannot normalize such a function and hence must reject it 
as physically inadmissible to quantum physics. 

Let’s review. We argued that the free-particle wave function we seek must satisfy 
three innocent-looking properties: it must be spatially-localized, complex, and consistent 
with the homogeneity requirement. Our first guess, the real harmonic wave, violated 
all of these conditions. Our second, the complex harmonic wave, violated only the 
requirement of spatial localization. But that’s not good enough. 

Our explorations have not led to the answer—but they have led to valuable clues. 
The complex harmonic function is so nearly the wave function we seek that it makes 
sense at this point to try to construct a spatially-localized function by adding together 
a bunch of these harmonic waves with different wave numbers and frequencies. In the 
next section, we’ll do just that: we’re going to build a wave packet. 


WAVE PACKET CONSTRUCTION FOR FUN AND PROFIT 

Go back to the functions graphed in Fig. 3.1. These are “snapshots” of physically admis¬ 
sible wave functions (taken at times when they happen to be real). Each wave function 
is characterized by a single dominant finite region of enhanced position probability —that 
is the distinctive feature of spatial localization. The probability density for each of these 
functions defines a “high probability” region of space, a realm of possible positions at 
which the particle is likely to be found. Our goal is to construct such a function. 

This point of view emphasizes why a single harmonic wave fails: such a wave 
is monochromatic (i.e., characterized by a single frequency), but regions of enhanced 
amplitude arise from the interference of harmonic waves with differing wave numbers 
and frequencies. This fact will be our guiding principle as we set out to build a free- 
particle wave function. And our tool will be superposition. 10 

It’s not hard to See how to use superposition to build a wave packet. In a superposi¬ 
tion of monochromatic harmonic waves, two kinds of interference happen. Constructive 
interference occurs at positions where the interfering waves are in phase, leading to an 


10 In this section, I’ll assume that you’re familiar with the mathematical and physical properties of 
waves at roughly the sophomore undergraduate level. If you need a refresher, try one of the Selected Readings 
at the end of this chapter. 


106 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



enhanced amplitude of the total wave. And destructive interference occurs where the 
interfering waves are out of phase, leading to a diminished amplitude. We can use these 
interference phenomena to construct a spatially localized function by forming a linear 
combination of complex harmonic waves with varying frequencies and amplitudes. Such 
a linear combination is called a wave packet. 

Applying these facts about waves to the task of § 4.1, constructing a function that 
satisfies the three criteria discussed there, we conclude that what we need is a complex 
wave packet with a single region of enhanced amplitude: 


free particle state function = a complex wave packet 


A Digression: The Pure-Momentum Function 


(4.21) 


Before we look at such packets we must get out of the way a mundane but important 
matter of notation. In spite of their defects, plane harmonic waves such as (4.16) are 
widely used in quantum mechanics, where they are usually written in terms of momentum 
and energy, as __ 

, *„(*,<) = Ae‘^- Et ^ | (4.22) 

Such a function is called, sensibly, a pure momentum function. Notice that I’ve 
appended a subscript p to ty(x f t) to remind us whB'rvaluFbTmbmentum we’re talking 
about. Similarly, when discussing the complex harmonic wave written in terms of the 
wave number k [Eq. (4.16)], I’ll sometimes affix to a subscript k. 

Aside: The Mathematics of Waves—Phase Velocity. The most important property 
of a harmonic wave is its propagation velocity, which is called phase velocity. The 
phase velocity is defined as the velocity of a point of constant phase. 11 For a one¬ 
dimensional wave the phase velocity is 


phase velocity (4.23) 

1 I'=consta»t 

For example, the phase velocity of a complex harmonic wave is [see Exercise 4.1] 

. w E 

Vph = Xu = - = (4.24) 

K J) 

So far I have left one thing in the pure momentum function (4.22) unspecified: the 
amplitude A. We’re at liberty to choose this constant to fit the physical conditions of 
our problem—and when we get to collision problems (Chap. 8) we’ll take advantage of 
this flexibility. But there is a conventional choice for A that exploits a nifty property of 
complex plane waves. 

If the problem we’re solving doesn’t suggest a value of A , a good choice for the 
complex harmonic wave ^k(x,t) is A = The resulting function 



11 If you are a little bit rusty on the meaning of these quantities please review. You’ll find useful 
information about phase velocities in such sources as Chap. 7 of Vibrations and Waves by A. P. French (New 
York: Norton, 1966) and in Waves by Frank S. Crawford, Jr. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968). 


Sec. 4.2 Wave Packet Construction for Fun and Profit 107 





*‘ ( * >0 = ~ h e ' 


( 4 . 25 ) 


i(kx—uft.) 


is, for reasons I’ll explain in a moment, called a normalized plan e wave . 

For the pure momentum function ^ p (rc,£), the optimum choice is A = 1 /\/2 ifh. 
The so-called normalized pure momentum function is 


<tp(x,t) = —== e i<px ~ El ^ r ‘ 
V2nh 


(4.26) 


From here on I’ll use these choices of A unless there is a good reason to do otherwise. 

You’ll discover why these choices are desirable as you work with the pure momen¬ 
tum function (see especially § 4.7). Here’s a preview: they enable us to take advantage 
of the fact that complex exponentials form a representation of the Dirac Delta function, 


1 f°° 

/ e -ik'x e ikx dx = 6 ( k _ k ,y 

■ * 2?r J _ 0 o 


(4.27) 


You’re probably wondering why I refer to these as “normalized” functions, when 
we know that a complex harmonic wave can’t be normalized. This usage is, indeed, 
inconsistent. Historically, it entered colloquial parlance (at least among mathematicians) 
because two “normalized plane waves” satisfy a kind of “pseudo-normalization integral,” 


/ OO 

\F£(a;, 0)^^(XyO) dx = 8(k — k'). Dirac Delta function normalization (4.28) 

■oo 

/ 

The General Form of a Wave Packet 

Equation (4.21) gives us our marching orders: to construct a free-particle wave function, 
we must add together (superpose) complex plane waves with different wave numbers k. 
Your first thought might be to try a linear combination of a finite number of plane waves 
with discrete wave numbers kj and amplitudes Aj , such as 


<b(x,t) 


N 






,i(kjX-LJjt) 


This reasonable suggestion runs aground on a basic property of waves: The superposition 
of a finite number of plane waves with discrete wave numbers has an infinite number of 
comparable regions of constructive interference. Each of these regions is separated from 
its neighbor by a region of destructive interference. This property of wave packets is 
illustrated in Fig. 4.4 and Problem 4.1. 


12 You may or may not have run across the Dirac Delta function 6(s) in your studies. Actually, 
it’s not a function at all; it’s what mathematicians call a functional. You can get an idea what 6(x) is by 
envisioning a “spike” that is zero everywhere except the point where its argument is zero, x = 0. So in (4.28), 
6(k - k') is zero everywhere except at at k = k\ where it’s infinite. You can find a brief overview of the 
Dirac Delta function and its properties in Appendix L. For more information, I recommend the introductory 
treatments found on pp. 53-55 of Quantum Physics by R. G. Winter (Belmont, Ca.: Wadsworth, 1979), and 
in Appendix 2 of Quantum Mechanics, Volume I by Claude Cohen-Tannoudji, Bernard Diu, and Franck Laloe 
(New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1977). 


108 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 





/?<?[*,(*, 0 )] 




Figure 4.4 A simple (and unsuitable) 
wave packet constructed by superposing 
a mere two plane harmonic waves. 

Each wave has equal amplitude, 

.A(ki) = A(k^) = A , but a different 
wave number: fcj = 127r, k 2 = 107r. 

(a) The first wave, 0). (b) The other 
wave, ^ 2 (^, 0 ). (c) Their superposition, 
^(.r,0) = 'J'i(.t.O) + tf 2 (a:,0). The 
spread of wave numbers for the plane 
waves in ty(.r, 0) is A k = 27r. (In this 
figure, only the real parts of the three 
waves are shown.) 


But we want a packet with one dominant region of enhanced amplitude—with a 
single biggest bump. [Additional regions of secondary amplitude (smaller bumps) are 
okay.] The solution is to use an infinite number of plane waves: 


/ / 


Since A: is a continuous variable, our wave packet will have the form of an integral 
over functions of the form To control the mixture of complex harmonic waves 

in the superposition, we’ll assign each complex plane wave an “amplitude” A(k). Using 
1 1 the normalized plane-wave functions (4.25), we write the general form for a wave 
1 packet as 


wave packet (4.29) 



Rule 

To construct a wave packet with a single dominant region of enhanced amplitude we must 
superpose an infinite number of plane wave functions with infinitesimally differing wave 
numbers. 


Sec. 4.2 


Wave Packet Construction for Fun and Profit 109 





At present, the amplitude function A(k) is arbitrary; in practice, we define this function 
to give \P(a;, t) physical properties that correspond to the quantum state it represents. 13 

Before going any further, I want to emphasize an extremely important point. Equa¬ 
tion (4.29) is applicable to many different (one-dimensional) quantum systems; it is not 
limited to the free particle. In fact, most of the results of this chapter are not limited to 
the free particle. It is crucial to remember that in constructing wave packets we specify 
a particular system by our choice of the dispersion relation co = co(k). For the free 
particle, the appropriate relation is (4.106), co(k) = hk 2 /2m. To apply the general form 
to other systems, we just select the appropriate dispersion relation. Please don’t forget 
this. 

Aside: The Mathematician’s View. A mathematician would probably interpret 
Eq. (4.29) as an expansion of ^{x,t) in a “complete set” of plane wave functions 
^•(z.i), with A(k) the expansion coefficient corresponding to the plane wave with 
wave number k. [The amplitude function A(k) is also sometimes called the spectral 
distribution function.] In Chap. 12 we’ll discover the (considerable) advantages to 
adopting this more formal perspective on superpositions of quantum waves. 

Do you understand how the superposition (4.29) forms a spatially localized func¬ 
tion? The key is the phases kx — cot of the constituent plane harmonic waves ^.(a:,^). 
Consider a fixed time—say, t = 0. At this time all waves in the packet are in phase 
at one (and only one) point. This value of x is the the point of total constructive in¬ 
terference. At this point the probability density P(x, 0) = |^(a;, 0)| 2 attains its global 
maximum ; for this reason, this point is called the center of the wave packet. We usually 
denote the center of the wave packet by x 0 . u 

Now, at any other x ± xo the plane waves in the packet are out of phase, so some 
destructive interference occurs. As we move away from the center of the packet (i.e., as 
\x — xo| increases), this interference becomes more and more destructive, until eventually 
the amplitude of the state function becomes negligibly small. This is why a wave packet 
is spatially localized [ c.f. , Eq. (3.29)]. 15 

When we construct a wave packet, we specify the system by the dispersion relation 
co = co(k). To specify a particular state of this system, we choose the amplitude function 
A(k). This function determines such properties of the packet as its “width”—the spread 
of values of x encompassed by 4 /(.t, 0). Let’s see how this works. 


13 There appears to be an inconsistency between the dimensions of the normalized plane wave (4.25), 
the normalized pure momentum state function (4.26), and the physically admissible state functions of Chap. 3. 
In one dimension, the latter must have units of inverse square root of length ( l/y/L ), because the inte¬ 
gral Jf° **(x,t)V(x,t)dx must be dimensionless [c.f., Eq. (3.28a)]. Sure enough, neither ^.(a;,t) nor 
4' p (x,i) has the correct dimensions. But this isn’t a problem because these functions appear in wave packets 
where they are multiplied by amplitude functions that fix the dimensionality of the packet. For example, the 
units of A(A;) in (4.32) are (see § 4.3) rfL. Similarly, in § 4.6 we’ll construct a wave function out of pure 
momentum state functions with an amplitude function 4>(p) that, when multiplied by ^ p (x, t), produces a 
packet with the correct dimensions. 

14 Be careful not to confuse the center of the wave packet with the average position, (x) (0); for some 
wave functions, these two points do coincide. But not for all. One other thing: the center of the packet at 
t = 0 need not be the origin of coordinates; we can construct a wave packet with its center at xo A 0 (see 
§ 4.6). 

l5 The argument I have sketched here is formally known as the stationary phase condition. This 
condition determines where the point of total constructive interference occurs for a superposition of plane 
waves. You can find a good introductory discussion of the stationary phase condition in § 2.5 of Introduction to 
the Quantum Theory , 2nd ed. by David Park (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1974) and more advanced discussions 
on p. 51 of Quantum Mechanics, Volume I by Albert Messiah (New York: Wiley, 1966) and on p. 19 of 
Quantum Mechanics, Volume I by Kurt Gottfried (Reading, Mass.: Benjamin/Cummings, 1966). 


110 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 


4.3 THE AMPLITUDE FUNCTION 


The amplitude function A(k) governs the mixture of plane harmonic waves in a particular 
wave packet; in this sense A(k) distinguishes one wave packet from another. In practice, 
we usually determine the amplitude function from the value of the state function at 
t = 0 (§ 4.4). But in this section I’ll take the amplitude function as given, because I 
want to show you—by example—how a superposition of an infinite number of complex 
harmonic waves with a particular amplitude function produces a wave packet with a 
single dominant region of enhanced position probability. We’ll also examine the subtle 
relationship between the evolution of a wave packet and the motion of a classical particle 
and will peek into a laboratory where wave packets are used in collision experiments. 

Figure 4.5 shows two typical amplitude functions. The function in Fig. 4.5a is 
peaked at k = ko> so the dominant plane wave in the packet formed when we insert this 
function into the general form (4.29) is ^f, 0 (x,t). Plane wave functions {x,t) with 
wave numbers far from k 0 make negligible contributions to the total packet ^(x,i). 



in (b) is a square step and is used in Example 4.1. In (b), the value of A(ko) = l/\/A k 
produces a properly normalized amplitude function (see § 4.4). 


The function in Fig. 4.5b is more equitable: all harmonic waves with wave numbers 
in the range k 0 - \ Ak < k < k 0 + \ Ak contribute equally to the resulting wave packet. 
In Example 4.1 we’ll construct a wave packet from this amplitude function. Stay tuned. 

Aside: On Complex Amplitude Functions. By the way, the sample amplitude 
functions in Fig. 4.5 are real. But A(k) can be (and often is) complex. If so, we 
sometimes choose to write it in terms of a magnitude |A(A;)| and a phase a(k), i.e., 

A(k) = |X(*)| e ,or<fc> . (4.30) 

It’s important to not lose sight of the physics amidst all the mathematics of wave 
packet construction. Try to think about these amplitude functions as controllers of the 
mixture of pure momentum states in the quantum state represented by the wave packet 
After all, each function in such a packet is associated (via the de 

Broglie relation) with a particular value of the momentum, p = hk. This way of looking 
at the superposition A(k)\V k (x, t) dx reveals that the momentum of a quantum state 

represented by a wave packet is uncertain , i.e., 

A p > 0. [for a wave packet]. (4.31) 

This connection between the amplitude function A(k) and the momentum uncertainty 
A p is no accident, and we’ll return to it in § 4.6 and 4.7. 


Sec. 4.3 The Amplitude Function 111 



Question 4-5 

What amplitude function A(k) would produce a packet with a well-defined momentum (i.e., 
with A p = 0)? What’s wrong with the function v]/(: z,t) you would get were you to insert 
this amplitude function into Eq. (4.29)? 


Example 4.3. Construction of a Valid State Function 

Let’s see what sort of wave packet we get when we use the amplitude function of Fig. 4.5b, 16 


A(k) = 


1 

\/A k 
0 


k 0 - ±A k <k<k 0 + ±Ak 
otherwise 


(4.32) 


For simplicity, we’ll consider only t = 0. 

With this amplitude function, the wave packet (4.29) becomes a simple finite integral 
over the region of wave number where A(k) is non-zero: 


^(s,0) = 


jl r 

\/2?r J _ 0 


A(k) e ikx dk 

/•A:o+ ^ AA: 

k J ko -i A k 


1 


e ikx dk. 


(4.33a) 


(4.33ft) 


Perusing our integral tables (Appendix I), we find the desired integral and easily derive 

#(.t, 0) = 2. - e' k ° x - sin (x^2) ■ (4.34) 

VziTKk x \ 2 ) 

The corresponding probability density, 


P{x ' 0)= 2^Ak^ Sin2 { X ^)’ 


(4.35) 


appears in Fig. 4.6. 


Question 4-6 

Evaluate the nonnalization integral for the state function (4.34). 

The wave function (4.34) has an infinite number of local maxima. Still, this 
function doesn’t violate the requirement of spatial localization, because the peak values 
of these humps decrease as x increases in either direction from x = 0. [This causes 
the envelope of the wave packet to die away to zero as |x| —> oo.] Consequently the 
probability density defines only one dominant region of enhanced position probability, 
as desired. 

Nevertheless, the position of a particle in an ensemble of particles represented by 
this state function is clearly uncertain: the function in Fig. 4.6 has a non-zero width 
(Ax > 0). Not surprisingly, the momentum is also uncertain (A p > 0). This result 
follows from the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle or, putting it mathematically, from 
the spread of wave numbers that characterizes the amplitude function (4.32). 

Example 4.1 illustrates important features of the wave packets used in quantum 
physics. To summarize: A wave packet is a normalizable function that is peaked about 

16 I chose the value of the constant A(k) = l/\/Ak so that the amplitude function would be normalized, 
i.e., so that J_ A*(k)A(k)dk = 1. That A(ft) satisfy this condition isn’t mathematically essential, but it 
is convenient (see § 4.4), and it takes care of the dimensionality problem noted in footnote 13. 


112 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 




Figure 4.6 The posilion probability 
density P(x , 0) for the wave packet 
erected in Example 4.3. This function is 
physically admissible because (among its 
other virtues) it is spatially localized. 


a point of total constructive interference, its center. This function is characterized by a 
non-zero but finite spread in the variables x and k. 


Wave Packet Motion and the Correspondence Principle 


In Example 4.1 we considered a wave packet at a fixed time. The way such packets 
evolve as time goes by is the subject of Chap. 6 (especially § 6.7). But I want to show 
you one feature of wave packet motion now, because it illustrates the quaint and curious 
relationship between quantum mechanics and classical physics, a pervasive theme of this 
book. 

Each of the monochromatic traveling waves that makes up a wave packet has a 
phase velocity v p i, = u/k. But the propagation velocity of the packet is, by definition, 
the velocity of its center. From your study of waves, you probably remember that this 
quantity is the group velocity and that (in one dimension) it is defined as 

dw 

v gr = — • 9 r °up velocity (4.36) 

dk k = Ao 

In words: we can calculate v gr by evaluating the first derivative of the dispersion relation 
tu = c o(k) at the center of the amplitude function, k = k 0 . 17 

We can easily figure out the group velocity of a free particle from the dispersion 
relation u{k) = hk 2 /(2m). Applying the definition (4.36), we find that for the (general) 
wave packet (4.29), 

hko p 0 

Vgr = - = — [for a free particle]. (4.37a) 

m m 

17 Wilh (he passing of time, most wave packets disperse (spread). But this phenomenon is not described 
by v gr , which provides information only about the propagation of the packet. Eventually, a packet may spread 
so much that it loses its definition; if this happens, the group velocity is no longer meaningful. 

Sec. 4.3 The Amplitude Function 113 



Does this result look familiar? It should: it’s the classical velocity that a particle of 
mass m would have if its momentum was po- 


_ ^ 

^classical — , 

dp 


P - Pt) 


Po 

m 


[classical physics] 


(4.376) 


Isn’t that interesting? 

Be careful about how you interpret this little demonstration. It’s very easy to 
be seduced by the similarity in Eqs. (4.37) into concluding that classical physics does 
pertain to microscopic particles. But this conclusion is not correct. What Eqs. (4.37) say 
is that a free particle wave packet with an amplitude function A(k) peaked about k = k 0 
evolves in such a way that the position of its center, the peak of the dominant region of 
enhanced probability, changes at a speed identical to that of a classical particle with the 
same mass and momentum hk 0 . It’s important to note that (4.376) pertains to a particle 
with a definite momentum, p 0 , while the wave packet from which we calculated (4.37 a) 
has an indeterminate momentum (A p > 0). 

This correspondence between the motion of a quantum-mechanical wave packet and 
the dynamics of a (related) classical particle is a manifestation of the Correspondence 
Principle (Chap. 2), according to which the predictions of quantum physics must reduce 
to those of classical physics “in the classical limit.” “But where,” I hear you wonder, 
“is ‘the classical limit’ in all this?” 

Splendid question. Look, a classical particle has a well-defined position and mo¬ 
mentum, so one way to take a wave packet to the classical limit is to reduce the position 
and momentum uncertainties to zero: 


Ax —> 0 and A p —> 0. classical limit of a wave packet (4.38) 

In this limit, the wave packet reduces to a probability amplitude that represents a state 
in which the position of the particle and its momentum are definite at each time [in fact, 
^(a*,f) reduces to a Dirac Delta function]. What we showed in Eqs. (4.37) is that this 
point moves through space at the speed predicted by classical physics. 18 

This insight is but a glimmer of a far more profound result we’ll discover in 
Chap. 11. There we’ll explore the classical limit of the laws of motion of quantum physics 
and will find that in the classical limit the expectation value (a*) ( t ) for a quantum state 
obeys Newton’s Second Law, i.e., the wave packet for a macroscopic particle follows 
that particle’s classical trajectory. 


Wave Packets in the Laboratory 


Do you feel as if you’re drowning, getting deeper and deeper into mathematics, leaving 
physics forever behind? Do you find it ominous that the next section is subtitled “A 
Mathematical Detour”? If so, don’t fret. As we master all this mathematics we’re really 
learning the language of quantum physics. But perhaps we should stop by the lab to 
see how an experimental physicist might produce a beam of free particles in a state that 
could be represented by a wave packet. 


18 Thc uncertainties in (4.38) are related by the Heisenberg Uncertainly Principle Ax A p > /i/2. From 
this relation, we could argue that the classical limit is that in which h is negligible and can hence be approx¬ 
imated by zero. This limit is sometimes written h -> 0—an expression that is probably perplexing, since h 
is not zero at all; it’s a constant equal to 1.0546 x lO -3 ' 1 J sec. If you want to read more about the corre¬ 
spondence principle, see the excellent discussion in Chap. 8 of Introduction to Quantum Mechanics by R. H. 
Dicke and J. P. Wittke (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, I960). 


114 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 





Such a beam would most likely be used in a collision experiment like the one 
sketched in Fig. 4.7. The source emits a beam of nearly mono-energetic particles—here, 
electrons—with energy E 0 and momentum p 0 = \/2m 0 E 0 , where m 0 is the rest mass 
of the projectile. (For an electron, m 0 = m e = 9.109 x 10 -31 kg.) The resulting beam 
travels a finite (but large) distance to the target, which might be a gas cell or a second 
beam directed at right angles to the electron beam. Scattered projectiles travel a finite 
(but large) distance to the detector, which we can move through space so as to sample 
the scattered particles at any angle. 


Shutter 


o— 

Source of 
electrons 


Detector 


-ED 

Target 


Figure 4.7 A (rather crude) schematic of a collision experiment. The target in this 
experiment is fixed. As described in the text, by judicious use of the shutter we can 
produce a pulse of electrons in a state represented by a wave packet with a known width 
Ax. 

If the density of the beam is low enough that to a good approximation the particles 
don’t interact and if the source “prepares” them so that all are in the same quantum 
state, then the beam is an ensemble (see Chap. 3). But what is the wave function that 
represents the particles in the beam? 

The nature of some collision experiments permits us to approximate this wave 
function by a plane wave (as the limit of an extremely fat wave packet; see § 6.9 
and 8.3). But in some experiments, the beam is “chopped”—rather like pepperoni. 

We could generate a chopped beam of electrons by, for example, placing a movable 
shutter in front of the opening in the source, as in Fig. 4.7. By rapidly raising, then 
lowering the shutter, we generate a pulse of electrons of length L. (The value of L is 
determined by the energy of the electrons and by how long the shutter is open.) This 
pulse is an ensemble of free particles whose state is represented by a wave packet. 

From the physical conditions in the laboratory, we can infer several features of this 
packet. For one thing, the position uncertainty of the particles in this beam is non-zero; 
in fact, Ax is roughly equal to the dimension of the beam: Ax « L. Consequently 
the momentum of the particles is not well-defined; rather, the state is characterized 
by a distribution of momenta that is peaked about p 0 . According to the Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle, the momentum uncertainty is roughly A p « h/(2L). All of these 
features conform to our understanding of the nature of a wave packet. 

Aside: Wave Packets for Three-Dimensional Systems. In general, we must treat 
a wave packet in the lab as a three-dimensional function. The three-dimensional 
extension of the general form (4.29) is 

4>(r,() = ‘- [ A(k)e lik r ~“ l> dk, (4.39a) 

where dk is a volume element in “momentum space” (e.g., in rectangular coordinates, 
rfk = dk s dk y dk z ). The center of this packet, r 0 (£)> propagates at the group velocity, 


Sec. 4.3 The Amplitude Function 115 




which is a vector determined by taking the gradient of the dispersion relation, viz., 
u> = w(k) at k = ko, i.e. 


v g r = V*w(k) 


*=* o 


(4.39 b) 


Fortunately, we usually need not consider explicitly two of the three dimensions of 
the packet’s motion. This bit of legerdemain will be explained in Chap. 8. 


The details of how to construct such a wave function are interesting, but discussing 
them would take us too far afield. But before we leave this section, I should note that in 
a real collision experiment, we can set the mean values and uncertainties of the position 
and momentum of the incident particles, to the precision allowed by nature and human 
fallibility. These characteristics define the wave packet that represents the state of the 
projectiles. And that is how we create and use wave packets in laboratory quantum 
physics. 


*4.4 FOURIER ANALYSIS (A MATHEMATICAL DETOUR) 

In § 4.2, we wrote down the general form (4.32) of a wave packet, 

V(x,t) = - 4 = r A{k)e i{kx - Ut) dk. (4.40a) 

v27T J —oc 

At t = 0, this equation takes on a form that may be familiar: 

#( 2 ;, 0) = 1— f A{k)e tkx dk. (4.40 b) 

V27T J— oc 

Equation (4.40b) reveals that the amplitude function A(k) is the Fourier transform of the 
state function ^(a;, £) at t = 0. That is, the amplitude function is related to the wave 
function at t = 0 by a Fourier integral. 19 

Fourier analysis—the generation and deconstruction of Fourier series and integrals 
—is the mathematical method that underlies the construction of wave packets by super¬ 
position. Fourier analysis is a vital element of our quantum mechanics’ tool kit, for we 
can use it to zip back and forth between the amplitude function and the corresponding 
state function. Moreover, the study of Fourier analysis leads to a deeper understand¬ 
ing of waves per se. When this method is applied to probability waves■ — i.e., to state 
functions—it leads to important, sometimes astonishing physical principles (see § 4.6). 
For all these reasons, we’re going to take a short sojourn into Fourier analysis. 

Mathematicians commonly use Fourier analysis to rip functions apart, representing 
them as sums or integrals of simple component functions, each of which is characterized 
by a single frequency. This method can be applied to any function f(x) that is piecewise 
continuous — i.e., that has at most a finite number of finite discontinuities. Wave functions, 
which must be continuous (see § 3.5), satisfy this condition and so are prime candidates 
for Fourier analysis. Moreover, Fourier analysis is a preview of an extremely powerful 
mathematical technique: the method of eigenfunction expansion (Chap. 12). 

Whether we represent f(x) via a Fourier series or a Fourier integral depends on 
whether or not this function is periodic. Any function that repeats itself is said to be 

19 If you already figured this out and don’t feel the need of a review of Fourier series and integrals, skip 
to § 4.5. (You may, however, want to read the last subsection—on the definition of the width of a function.) 
If you’ve never studied Fourier analysis, you’ll find a list of good references at the end of this chapter. 


116 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



periodic. More precisely, if there exists a finite number L such that f(x + L) = f(x), 
then f(x) is periodic with period L. Perhaps the most familiar periodic functions are 
sin(27rz/L), cos(2ttx/L ), and exp(27na:/L). We can write any function that is periodic 
(or that is defined on a finite interval) as a Fourier series. But if f(x) is non-periodic 
or is defined on the infinite interval from -oo to +oo, we must use a Fourier integral. 

Fourier Series 

Fourier series are not mere mathematical devices; they can be generated in the laboratory. 
For example, a spectrometer decomposes an electromagnetic wave into spectral lines, 
each of which has a different frequency and amplitude (intensity). Thus, a spectrometer 
decomposes a periodic function in a fashion analogous to the Fourier series. But our 
present concern is with the mathematics. 

Suppose we want to write a periodic, piecewise continuous function f(x) as a 
series of simple functions. Let L denote the period of f(x), and choose as the origin of 
coordinates the midpoint of the interval defined by this period, -L/2 <x< L/2. (This 
choice allows us to exploit the symmetry (if any) of f{x).) 

The particular functions that appear in the Fourier series expansion of a periodic 
function are sines and cosines. Letting a„ and b n denote (real) expansion coefficients, 
we write this series as 20 

oc 

f(x) = a 0 + J2 

71 = 1 

We calculate the coefficients in (4.41) from the function f(x) as 





1 

rL/2 





ao : 

= L 

J-L/2 

f(x) dx 

(4.42a) 

2 

a 7l — r 

L j 

,L/2 

'-L/2 

/M 

(cos 

/ X 

i 2m L 

) dx (n = 1,2,...) 

(4.42 b) 

L 2 

[L/2 

f(x) 


f X 



bn = 7 

Lj 

'-L/2 

I sin ( 

2nn— 
< L. 

j dx (n= 1,2,...) 

(4.42c) 


Notice that the summation in (4.41) contains an infinite number of terms. In practice 
we retain only a finite number of these terms—this approximation is called truncation. 
Truncation is viable, of course, only if the sum converges to whatever accuracy we want 
before we chop it off. 

A Mathematical Aside: On Truncation. Truncation is not as extreme an act as it 
may seem. If f(x ) is normalizable, then the expansion coefficients in (4.41) decrease 
in magnitude with increasing n, i.e., 

|a„| —► 0 and |6„ | —> 0 as n —* oo. 

Under these conditions, which are satisfied by physically admissible wave functions, 
the sum (4.41) can be truncated with impunity at some finite maximum value n„ lax 
of the index n. Of course, a certain amount of trial and error is required to determine 
the value of n,„ a x that is required for the desired accuracy. 

20 Beware: the precise form of the Fourier series (and integral) representations of a function depend on 
the interval of periodicity: many authors choose the limits of this interval to be — L and +L. 

Sec. 4.4 Fourier Analysis (A Mathematical Detour) 117 


a, i cos ^27rn^ + b n sin tarn— 11 . real Fourier series (4.41) 



Truncation is not the only simplification one stumbles across in working with 
Fourier series. If f(x) is particularly simple, all but a small, finite number of terms in 
(4.41) may be zero. And you should always look for coefficients that are zero before 
you start grinding out integrals. This advice leads to the question: how can we spot such 
coefficients without evaluating them? That is, what (other than an accident) could make 
an expansion coefficient zero? 

The Power of Parity 

In Example 3.4, we saw that parity arguments can render integral evaluation trivial if the 
integrand is an odd function of the variable of integration. The same thing is true of the 
integrals in the expansion coefficients (4.42): they call for integration over a symmetric 
integral (from -L/2 to +L/2) of an integrand that involves trigonometric functions with 
well-known parity properties: 21 

sin(— x) = — sinrc (odd) (4.43a) 

cos(-rc) =+cosx (even) (4.43 b) 

From Eqs. (4.43) it follows that if f(x) has definite parity, then either the integrand 
in a n or that in b n will be odd: 


Rule 

If f(x) is even or odd, then half of the expansion coefficients in its Fourier series are zero. 


If, for example, f(x) is odd [i.e., f(—x) = -f(x)], then all the coefficients a n 
are zero, and we’re left with a series involving only the “sine coefficients” b n . Such a 
series is called a Fourier sine series. The constant coefficient a 0 in (4.41) is zero for 
any function of definite parity. So if f{x) is such a function, there are two possibilities: 


f{x) is odd [f(—x) = -f(x)] => 

a n =0 (n = 1,2,...) 

j OO 

f( x ) = Yl bn sin ( 27rn ^) 


Fourier sine series 


(4.44a) 


f(x) is even [/(-x) = +/(x)] => 

b„= 0 (71=1,2,...; 


OO 

f(x) = ^2 a n cos (2^0 


71=1 


Fourier cosine series 


(4.446) 


21 For more on parity in Fourier analysis, see § 5.10 of Advanced Calculus for Applications by F. B. 
Hildebrand (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1962). 


118 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 






Aside: Functions That Don’t Have Definite Parity. The Fourier sine and cosine 
expansions may come in handy even if f(x) does not have definite parity, because 
we can easily write any function as the sum of an even function and an odd function. 
Suppose fix) is neither even nor odd [/>., f(-x) ^ ±f(x)]. Let’s define two new 
functions g(x) and h(x) as 


9(x) = 5 [f{x) + /(-a;)] 
h(x) = A[/(s)-/(-*)]. 

By definition, < 7 ( 0 ;) is even and h{x) is odd. Using these definitions, we can write 
the function f(x) as [see the next Question] 

f{x) = gix)^+hix)^. 

even odd 

So for the rest of this section, I’ll assume that fix) is either even or odd. 

Question 4-7 

Write down the functions gix) and /i(x) for 

fix) = ^e~ x2 + 7x 
and prove that each has definite parity. 


Fourier and His Series: A Historical-Mathematical Aside. As a brief respite 
from all this math, let’s look back in time. The method of representing functions 
by series (or integrals) of sine and cosine functions was derived by a Frenchman 
named Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768-1830). When young, Fourier dreamed 
of serving in the French army. (Had these dreams not been dashed, Fourier might 
not have become much older.) But he was too adept at mathematics for the French 
government to let him become cannon fodder, so Fourier had to settle for a career as 
a world-renowned mathematician. In the early 1800’s, Fourier set out to find a way 
to represent functions in terms of sines and cosines. 

To develop a series representation of a periodic function fix), Fourier used 
a rather standard optimization technique. His first step was to write the function he 
wanted to represent as a finite series of the form 

I< 

fi<ix) = a 0 + 

71=1 

The subscript I< in this expansion indicates the number of terms included in it. Fourier 
then asked: what choices for the coefficients a n and b u lead to a function fxix) that 
most closely approximates fix) — i.e., to the “best” such representation? His answer: 
the function with coefficients that minimize the mean square deviation, 22 

1 r+V 2 

J [f(x)-f K (x)fdx. 

Fourier easily implemented that minimization via the orthogonality relations 
for the sine and cosine: 


/ rc'N 

1 . ( x\ 

a n cos 27rn— 

4- b n sin 27m— 

V L) 

V L). 


J cos ^2irn—^ sin ^27r dx = 0 


(4.45a) 


22 We have met this sort of beast before (in § 3.3); it is just a measure of the extent to which the series 
representation fxix) differs from f(x) over the interval [—L/2,+L/2], 


Sec. 4.4 Fourier Analysis (A Mathematical Detour) 119 



rL/2 

( x ) 

( x \ 

1 COS 1 

27m- 

COS 27T7n — 

J-L/2 

^ L ) 

' \ L) 


dx = 


J sin ^2-k n j^j sin dx 


{ 0 , if m ± n\ 
1, if m = n. 


(4.456) 


What he found—the optimum expansion coefficients—are those of Eqs. (4.42). 

Following this signal success, Fourier went on to write a classic study of heat 
(which he believed to be vital to man’s health) and then died tumbling down a flight 
of stairs. But his theory lives on. 


The Fourier series is by no means the only way to expand a function. (You probably 
know about the most common alternative, a Taylor series.) But its value derives in part 
from its wide applicability. Moreover, evaluation of the Fourier coefficients is usually 
comparatively easy. Because the integrals (4.42) involve sines and cosines, they can 
often be dug out of integral tables. Even if /( x) is sufficiently nasty that the required 
integrals are too complicated to evaluate analytically, we can always dump them on the 
nearest computer. (Computers love sines and cosines.) 


The Complex Fourier Series 


If /(re) does not have a definite parity, we can expand it in a complex Fourier series. 
To derive this variant on the Fourier series (4.41), we just combine the coefficients a n 
and b n so as to introduce the complex exponential function e i2nnx l L \ viz., 

oo 

f{x) = ^ c n e"™ x ' L . Complex Fourier Series (4.46) 

n=— oo 

Note carefully that in the complex Fourier series (4.46) the summation runs from — oo 
to oo. The expansion coefficients c n for the complex Fourier series are 

1 r L t 2 

c n = y f(x)e- i2nnx ' L dx. (4.47) 

L J-L/2 

As you might expect, in general these coefficients are complex. 

Question 4-8 

Derive Eqs. (4.46) and (4.47) and thereby determine the relationship of the coefficients c„ 
of the complex Fourier series of a function to the coefficients a n and b n of the corresponding 
real series. 

Fourier Integrals 

I have emphasized that only a periodic function (or one defined on a finite interval) can 
be expanded in a Fourier series. To represent a non-periodic function in terms of sines 
and cosines, we resort to an integral: any normalizable function can be expanded in an 
infinite number of sine and cosine functions that have infinitesimally differing arguments. 
Such an expansion is called a Fourier integral. 23 

The Fourier integral representation of a non-periodic function looks a little like the 
complex Fourier series representation (4.46) of a periodic function. Its general form is 

23 A function f(x) can be represented by a Fourier integral provided the integral J°° |/(.t)| dx exists. 
All wave functions satisfy this condition, for they are normalizable. 


120 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 




The function g(k) in (4.48) plays the role analogous to that of the expansion coefficients 
c n in the complex series (4.46). The relationship of g(k ) to f(x) is more clearly exposed 
by the inverse of (4.48), 


Fourier transform (4.49) C/ 

In mathematical parlance, f(x) and g(k) are said to be Fourier transforms of one 
another. More precisely, g(k) is the Fourier transform of f(x), and f(x) is the inverse 
Fourier transform of g(k). When convenient, I’ll connote these relationships by the 
shorthand notation 

9(k) = F[f{x)] and f(x) = F~ l [g(k)]. (4.50a) y 

Our immediate application of Fourier transform theory is to the wave packet S'(a, 0) 
and its amplitude function A(k). If we translate the relationship (4.40ft) between these 
functions into our new notation, we have 

(4.50ft) (/ 

Many useful relationships follow from the intimate relationship between f(x) and 
g(k). For our purposes, the most important is the so-called Bessel-Parseval relationship: 

J \f(x)\ 2 dx = 

[Don’t forget the absolute value bars in (4.51); they are essential if f(x) is complex.] 
Among the many applications of this relationship in quantum mechanics is the normal¬ 
ization of the amplitude function (§ 4.7). 

Question 4-9 

Use the properties of the Dirac Delta function to prove the Bessel-Parseval relationship 
(4.51). 

How Wide is My Wave Function? (A Short Discourse on 
Widths) 

Mathematicians, scientists, and engineers often talk about the “width” of a function. 
Unfortunately, these folk have been unable to agree on precisely what they mean by “the 
width of a function,” so in your reading you may come across diverse definitions of this 
quantity. 

But the idea is simple and the name appropriate: The “width” w x of a function 
f(x) is just a quantitative measure of its spread, its spatial extent. We have already seen 
(in several examples) that the width of any normalizable function is finite and non-zero: 
i.e., 0 < w x < oo. But beyond this observation, confusion reigns. In Fig. 4.8 you’ll find 
some widely used definitions of w x . 

To avoid further confusion, I want to get my definition up front right now. In this 
book l shall define the width of a function f(x) to be the standard deviation of its position, 



A(k) = ^(a,0)] 


tffoO) = f-'iAik)} 



Sec. 4.4 Fourier Analysis (A Mathematical Detour) 121 







as defined in § 3.3 [see Eq. (3.25)]. Hence the width of a state function $( x,t ) is its 
position uncertainty Ax, as illustrated in Fig. 4.8c. 




Figure 4.8 A cornucopia of definitions of the width w x of a function /(x). The function at 

hand is f(x) = e - * 2 . (a) The full-width-at-half-maximum, w x = 1.665. (b) The extent of the 

2 

function at the special point where /(x) = [/(x)] m ax/e. The function e~ x is equal to 1/e of its 
maximum value at x = ±1, so this definition gives w x = 1.736. (c) My definition: the standard 
deviation of x; for this function, w x = Ax = 0.560. 


We can define a width for any function; for example, the width Wk of the ampli¬ 
tude function A(k) is a measure of its extent in the variable k (see § 4.7). And, not 
surprisingly, if two functions are related, so may be their widths. For instance, there is 
an “inverse correlation” between the width w x of a function f(x) and the width Wk of 
its Fourier transform: the wider the function f(x ), the narrower its Fourier transform 
g(k). From an analysis of the Fourier integral (4.48), mathematicians have shown that 


122 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



w x w k « 1 . 


(4.52a) 


| /M = F 1 [$(*)] => 

Question 4-10 

Explain briefly why Eq. (4.52a) is true. Base your argument on the amount of destructive in¬ 
terference in the wave packet as the distance from the point of total constructive interference 
increases. 

Although Eq. (4.52a) is useful, it expresses this inverse relationship only qualita¬ 
tively. But the precise value of the product w x w k depends on the precise definition of 
w x and w k . With my definition of w x and w k as the standard deviations of position and 
wavenumber, this relation takes on the form 


(4.526) 


In § 4.6, we’ll translate this relationship into a principle (which you can probably guess 
now) that relates a critical physical property of a state function and its amplitude func¬ 
tion. 



4.5 AN EXTENDED EXAMPLE: THE GAUSSIAN WAVE PACKET 
UNMASKED 

In Example 4.1 we used a known amplitude function A(k) to construct a free-particle 
wave packet (at t = 0 ) as a superposition of complex harmonic waves. Mathematically 
speaking, we were calculating the wave function as the inverse Fourier transform of the 
amplitude function : 

1 f°° 

S'foO) = T-'{A(k)\ = -= / A(k)e ikx dk. (4.53a) 

v27T J — oo 

In quantum physics, we usually want to go the other way, to calculate the amplitude 
function as the Fourier transform of the wave function at the initial time t = 0: 

A(k) = J'[4'(x,0)] = -= / ^(x, 0)e~' kx dx. (4.53 b) 

v27T J —oo 

In this section I want to illustrate this technique by examining an extremely important 
type of state function: the Gaussian function. In particular, we’ll generate the amplitude 
function for a simple Gaussian function and then look at its width. What we discover 
when we do so will carry us back into the physics of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 
(§ 4.6). 

Example 4.4. The Amplitude Function for a Gaussian 

The Gaussian function is a wave packet with a well-defined center and a single peak. Its 
amplitude function, which we’re going to calculate, has the same properties. In § 6.7 we’ll 
watch the time development of a Gaussian function; here we consider only t = 0. The 
Gaussian function contains one parameter, a real number L that governs its width. 

The most general form of such a function has a center at xq / 0 and corresponds to 
an amplitude function that is centered at k 0 ^ 0: 

*<-.<» = e ‘ k ° X ( 4 . 54 ) 


Sec. 4.5 An Extended Example: The Gaussian Wave Packet Unmasked 123 




But for simplicity, I want to consider a Gaussian centered at xo = 0 with an amplitude 
function centered at ko = 0, i.e., 

*{x,t = o) = (—^j) 1/4 e(4.55) 

In Fig. 4.9, you’ll find two such wave packets (with different values of L). Each exhibits 
the characteristic shape of a Gaussian function: each has a single peak and decreases rather 
rapidly as x increases from zero. But because the Gaussian function decays exponentially , 
it never actually equals zero for finite x. (It is, nonetheless, normalizable.) You’ll also 
find in Fig. 4.9 the probability density |^(x,0)| 2 for a Gaussian. This figure illustrates one 
of the special properties of a Gaussian wave function: its probability is also a Gaussian 
function, one that has the same center but is narrower than the state function from which it 
is calculated. 



Figure 4.9 Two Gaussian wave packets of the form (4.55); the parameter L for these 
functions takes on the values L = 0.5 and L = 1.0 (solid curves). The corresponding 
probability density for L = 1.0 is shown as a dashed curve. 


Question 4-11 

Verify that the state function (4.55) is normalized. 

To see precisely how individual plane harmonic waves combine to form 

a Gaussian wave packet, let’s evaluate the amplitude function A(k). We begin by 
substituting the state function (4.55) into the general expression (4.536) for the amplitude 
function, viz., 



dx. 


(4.56) 


124 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



This rather nasty-looking integral is a standard (if perhaps unfamiliar) form : 24 

J e~ ax2 ~ px dx = y^ e/32/(4a) * (a>0) (4.57) 

This handy form is just what we need to conquer the integral in (4.56). Letting 
a = 1/(4L 2 ) and (3 = ik in this expression, we obtain 

/2 \ 1/4 22 

A(k) = ( — L 2 j e~ k L . [for a Gaussian with xo = OJ. (4.58) 

Compare carefully the mathematical form of the amplitude function (4.58) and the (initial) 
wave function (4.55). Lo and behold: the Fourier transform of a Gaussian function of 
the variable x is a Gaussian of the variable k. (Please don’t generalize: this reciprocity 
is not a general property of functions and their Fourier transforms; it is a special feature 
of the Gaussian function.) 

The Gaussian 4/(:c,0) and its amplitude function are graphed in Fig. 4.10. As 
advertised above, the center of A(k) —the value of the wave number at the peak of the 
amplitude function—is at k 0 = 0. Both the wave function and the amplitude function 
have a non-zero width, and from the (Fourier transform) relationship these functions 
bear to one another, it’s not surprising that their widths are inversely related 25 [c.f, 
Eqs. (4.52)]: w x w k « 1. 

Normalization of the Amplitude Function 


In Question 4-11 I asked you to verify that the Gaussian wave function is normalized. 
Happily, we need not explicitly normalize the amplitude function calculated from this 
wave function, because a property of Fourier transforms—the Bessel-Parseval relation¬ 
ship (4.51)—guarantees that the Fourier transform of a normalizedfunction is normalized : 

/ OO poo 

\A(k)\ 2 dk = / |*(a;,0)| 2 <fa: = l. (4.59) 

-oo J —oo 


24 Gaussian functions occur so often in quantum physics and chemistry that most of their mathematical 
properties have been derived and tabulated. You’ll find enough information to work the problems in this 
book in Appendix J, which is based on the Appendix in Elementary Quantum Mechanics by David S. Saxon 
(San Francisco: Holden-Day,1968). To find everything you could conceivably want to know about Gaussian 
functions (and more) get a copy of “The Gaussian Function in Calculations of Statistical Mechanics and 
Quantum Mechanics,” which appears in Methods of Computational Physics, Volume 2, edited by B. Alder, S. 
Fembach, and M. Rotenberg (New York: Academic Press, 1963). 

25 A word about widths of Gaussian functions: The conventional value of the width of a Gaussian 
function of the form (4.54) is w x = L/\/ 2. This differs from what my definition gives, w x = Ax = L. 
The difference arises because many authors use L as the width not of the wave function but rather of the 
probability density. I further need to alert you that many authors define the Gaussian function in a slightly 
different fashion than I have, using L/y /2 everywhere that I have used L. In a book that adopts this form, 
you’ll see, instead of Eq. (4.54), the function 


*(*,* = 0 ) = (^) 1/4 

Both forms are OK—after all, it’s the x-dependence of this function that identifies it as a Gaussian. I prefer 
(4.54) because it leads to simple expressions for the position and momentum uncertainties. But this multiplicity 
of conventional forms should cause no difficulty: you can regain our equations from those in a book that adopts 
this alternate form by replacing L everywhere by L/y/ 2. 


Sec. 4.5 An Extended Example: The Gaussian Wave Packet Unmasked 125 






Figure 4.10 (a) A Gaussian wave packet 
and (b) its Fourier transform. Note that the 
two functions have the same mathematical 
form [see Eq. (4.58)]. Also note that the 
constant 1/(2 L) plays the same role in 
A(fc) that L docs in ^(s,0). 



Of course, the Bessel-Parseval equality applies to any wave function and its amplitude 
function—not just to a Gaussian. And Eq. (4.59) comes in handy in problem solving, as 
a way to check the (sometimes considerable) algebra required to evaluate an amplitude 
function: you can be pretty sure that if you made a mistake in the evaluation of A(k), 
then the resulting function will not be normalized. Consider this a hint. 

The Width of a Gaussian and Its Amplitude Function 


Before leaving the Gaussian wave function, I want to probe further the relationship be¬ 
tween its width and that of its amplitude function. According to my definition, the widths 


126 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



of these Gaussian functions, w x and wk, respectively, are just the standard deviations 
Ax and A k we calculate according to the expressions of § 3.3. 

Example 4.5. The Product of the Widths 

i Consider a Gaussian of the form (4.55) with L = 1. Evaluating the standard deviation of 

I such a function is quite easy (see Example 3.5), viz., 

I —- 

Ax = 1 for *(x,0) = e~ x2/4 . (4.60) 


So all we need is Afc. 

To evaluate this quantity from A(A;), we just generalize Eq. (3.45) for Ax to a function 
whose independent variable is k instead of x : 

(Ah) 2 = (k 2 ) - (k) 2 . (4.61 a) 

The mean values in this expression are 

(k) = f A*(k)kA(k)dk 

J —OO 

/ oo 

A*(k) k 2 A(k)dk 

*OO 

Now, substituting the amplitude function (4.58) with L = 1 into these equations and 
performing a little simple algebra, we find 

Afc = ^ for ^(x,0) = e -l2/4 . (4.62) 

Combining this result with (4.59) for the width of the wave function, we obtain the product 

Ax A k = ^ for ^(x,0) = e -a:2/4 . (4.63) 

This result is a special case of Eq. (4.526), according to which the product of the widths 
of two wave packets of any form is greater than or equal to 1/2. In fact, the Gaussian 
function is the only mathematical form for which this product equals 1/2. In qualitative 
terms, Eq. (4.63) just illustrates a familiar property of wave packets (§ 4.4): the greater the 
spread of the amplitude function, the narrower the extent of the wave function and position 
probability density for the state. 

Question 4-12 

The amplitude function for the general form of the Gaussian, Eq. (4.54), is 
A(k) = 

Prove that the standard deviations in x and k for the general form of a Gaussian packet— 
(4.54) with arbitrary L —are 


(4.616) 

(4.61c) 


Ax = L and 



Sec. 4.5 An Extended Example: The Gaussian Wave Packet Unmasked 127 



Time Development: A Glimpse Ahead 


Although I promised to wait until Chap. 6 to deal with the time development of wave 
functions, I can’t resist showing you how easily we can write down a general fonn 
for t) once we have in hand the amplitude function. This function appears in the 
general form of a wave packet [Eq. (4.29)]: 

= --L f A(k)e i(kx - Ul) dk. (4.64) 

V27T J—oo 


Since the amplitude function doesn’t depend on £, we just insert it into (4.64) and voila: 
we’ve got an integral fonn of the wave function at any time. My point in showing 
you this is to suggest an important connection between the initial wave function and its 
subsequent fonn, a connection that can be made through the medium of the amplitude 
function: 


^(s,0) 


m 




(4.65) 


Notice, by the way, that to generate ^{x,t) from A(k) we must know the dispersion 
relation u(k) for the system. 


Question 4-13 

Write down the state function ^(x,<) that has a Gaussian with L = 1 as its initial value 
at = t = 0. 


In Chap. 12, we’ll discover lurking in the connection (4.65) a powerful problem 
solving strategy, one that can be applied to a wide variety of systems to bypass the task 
of solving the Schrodinger Equation. 


4.6 UNCERTAINTY REGAINED 


One of the defining characteristics of a wave packet 


/ oo 

A(k)'fr tc (x,t) 

-oo 


dk 


(4.66) 


is its non-zero (but finite) standard deviation: Ax > 0. If the packet represents a state of 
a particle at time t, then this mathematical fact has an important physical interpretation: 
the position of the particle is uncertain. 

Similarly, the amplitude function A(k), the Fourier transform of ^(z.O), is char¬ 
acterized by a non-zero (finite) standard deviation Ak. And, as I emphasized in § 4.3, 
this mathematical fact has important consequences for the momentum: this observable is 
necessarily uncertain [Eq. (4.31)]: Ap = hAk > 0. Notice that this conclusion pertains 
to any state of any system, provided the state is represented by a wave packet. Were 
we to measure the momentum on an ensemble of particles in such a state, we’d obtain 
results that fluctuate around the mean value (p). 

I This summary illustrates how in quantum physics mathematical properties of waves 

translate into physical characteristics of particles in quantum states represented by wave 
j functions. The lexicon of the simplest such translations is the two de Broglie relations 
I p — hk and E = hu. 


128 


Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 




Let’s see what happens if we use these relations to translate the fundamental wave 
property that relates the standard deviations of a wave packet and its Fourier transform. 

Return of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 

The standard deviations Ax and A k are related by [Eq. (4.526)] AxAk > 1/2. Trans¬ 
lating these standard deviations into position and (via p = hk) momentum uncertainties, 
we trivially regain the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle (HUP): 26 

AxAp>^h. (4.67) 

In quantum mechanics, we calculate the position uncertainty Aa; from the state function 
\£(a;,£) and the momentum uncertainty A p from the amplitude function A(k) as 

Aa; = y/(Ax) 2 = \j(x 2 ) - (x) 2 (4.68a) 

A p = hs/(Kkf = h\J(k 2 )-(kf (4.686) 

Note carefully the inequality in Eq.(4.67). Only one wave packet gives equality in 
Eq. (4.67), the Gaussian function of § 4.4: 

f 'L\ • ^'f) AxAp = ift (Gaussian wave packet) (4.69) 

For this reason a Gaussian is sometimes referred to as the minimum uncertainty wave 
packet. 21 

Our derivation of the HUP is so straightforward that you may be tempted to over¬ 
look its profound implications. Equation (4.67) appears here as an inevitable consequence 
of our decision (Postulate I) to represent quantum states by wave functions that (Postu¬ 
late II) are interpreted as position probability amplitudes (and hence must be spatially 
localized). I hope this derivation convinces you once and for all that uncertainty rela¬ 
tions are intrinsic to the quantum-mechanical description of the microverse and as such 
are wholly unrelated to experimental error or defects in measuring apparatus. Note also 
the generality of our argument: it shows that the HUP is not limited to a particular 
microscopic system or quantum state. This is heady stuff, and I suggest you pause and 
ponder the subtle and beautiful interplay of mathematics and physics in the remarkably 
simple derivation of Heisenberg’s profound principle. 

Aside: The Uncertainty Principle in Three Dimensions. For a particle in three 
dimensions with wave function ^(r, <), the rectangular components of position and 
momentum—the components of r and p along the orthogonal axes e x , e y , and e z — 
obey uncertainty relations like (4.67): 


26 Because these uncertainties have explicit definitions, some authors call Eq. (4.67) “the precise uncer¬ 
tainty principle.” Whatever you call it, this inequality is a special case of the Generalized Uncertainty Principle 
(the GUP). The GUP, which we’ll meet in § 11.4, is an indeterminacy relationship between the uncertainties 
of any two observables that cannot simultaneously be measured to infinite precision. As noted in Chap. 2, two 
such observables are complementary in the sense that the more we know about one, the less we can know 
about the other. 

27 You can prove this assertion by minimizing the product Ax Ap. For the details, see § 10.9 of 
Quantum Theory by David Bohm (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1953). 


Sec. 4.6 Uncertainty Regained 129 



(4.70) 


Ax Ap x > \h 
AyAp y > \h 
AzAp z >\h. 


Fig. 4.11 summarizes graphically the correlation between the position and momen¬ 
tum uncertainties that is expressed mathematically in the HUP (4.67). For a narrow state 
function (Fig. 4.1 la), the position of the particle is rather well-defined (i.e., Ax is small). 
But, inevitably, the corresponding amplitude function A{k) = T[^(x^ 0)] encompasses 
a wide range of pure momentum states (Fig. 4.11b). So we know very little about the 
momentum of the particle in such a state, and Ap is large. On the other hand, a broad 
state function (Fig. 4.1 lc) implies a more precise knowledge of momentum (Fig. 4.1 Id). 

With the translation of wave properties of the Fourier transform A(k) of d>(a;, 0) 
into physical statements concerning momentum, we have broadened our insight into the 
physical content of the state function. Back in Chap. 3, we considered this function solely 
as a source of information about position. But in this chapter we’ve discovered how 
to extract statistical information concerning a momentum measurement (the uncertainty 
Ap = hAk) from the state function via its amplitude function. But this is not the only 
momentum information that lies hidden in A(k)‘, in the next section we’ll see how to 
dig out detailed probabilistic information about a measurement of this observable. 



(NOT QUITE) ALL ABOUT MOMENTUM 

As you’ve doubtless deduced, there is buried in the amplitude function a wealth of 
physical information about momentum. In fact, we can determine from this function 
probabilistic and statistical information about momentum that is analogous to the infor¬ 
mation about position we can extract from ty(x,t). To show you how, I first want to 
rewrite the general form (4.29) of the wave packet, 


1 f°° 

<S(x,t) = -/= / A(k)e i{ltx - Wt) dk, (4.71) 

V 2 7T J—oo 

in terms of the pure momentum state functions I introduced in § 4.2 [Eq. (4.26)]: 



(4.72) 

V27t h 

To do so requires only a simple change of variable—but even so simple a task can hide 
traps for the unwary. 


Changing Variables in the Amplitude Function 

At first, the necessary variable change seems trivial. The de Broglie relation p = hk 
shows us how to change from wave number to momentum, so to write \I>(a;,£) as an 
integral over p we first define a new function—say, 3>(p)—that is proportional to the 
amplitude function A(k). We then just write the Fourier transform relation (4.71) as an 
integral over 3>(p)$ p (£, t) expressing the differential volume element dk as dk = dp/h. 
This is a good plan, but I’m going to vary it slightly so as to minimize later anguish. 
I’ll define the function $(p) in tenns of the amplitude function A(k) as 

P 
h 


momentum probability amplitude 


(4.73) 




130 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 




Figure 4.11 Illustrations of the inverse relationship between the widths of ^(a:,0) and A(k). 
Because of this relationship, the momentum uncertainty in the state represented by *F(x,0) is 
inversely correlated with the position uncertainty Ax via the HUP, Eq. (4.67). 


Notice that, by analogy with the position probability amplitude ^(rc, t), I’ve dubbed <3?(p) 

the momentum probability amplitude. 

In terms of this function, the wave packet (4.71) at t = 0 becomes the momentum 
integral 



[Don’t fret about the peculiar factors of 1/VK in Eqs. (4.73) and (4.74); I’ll explain what 
I am doing in the next aside.] 


Sec. 4.7 (Not Quite) All About Momentum 131 






The inverse of (4.74), the expression for $(p) as an integral with respect to x of 
^x, 0), follows easily from the definition (4.73): 

1 f°° 

$(?) = -=/ *(®,0 )e- i <‘*' h dx. (4.75) 

/ \J2rth 7-oo 

f j | We find, not unexpectedly, that the momentum probability amplitude is the Fourier trans- 

I 1 1 form of the position probability amplitude, with x and p rather than x and k as the 
transformation variables: 


(4.76) 


I prefer Eqs. (4.76) to the Fourier relationships of § 4.5 for ^(x, 0) and A(k), these 
equations emphasize the physically important variables position and momentum. So 
unless I tell you otherwise, please understand the shorthand relations (4.76) to refer to 
Eqs. (4.74) and (4.75) [see the summary in Fig. 4.12]. 


4'(x,0) = ^- , [4>(p)] 
*(P) = *■[*(*.<>)] 





+<*. 0) « J-' (<!>(p)] 

Position probability amplitude -►- ., ... -*—Momentum probability amplitude 

4>(p) = ffl't'lx, 0)] 

Figure 4.12 Summary of the Fourier relationships between a state function ^(x,0) and the cor¬ 
responding momentum probability amplitude 4>(p). 

We can generalize the momentum-integration form of the wave packet, (4.74), to 
arbitrary time, just as we did to obtain the wave-number-integration form in Eq. (4.64) 
of § 4.5: 



*(»,*) 




$(p) e '(p*- B1 )M dp 


/ OO 

$(p) tf p (x, 

-oo 


£) dp. 


(4.77 a) 
(4.77 b) 


132 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



Of course, to apply Eqs. (4.77) to a particular system, we must relate u and k via the 
appropriate dispersion relation. Once we have done so, we can express any state function 
as a superposition of pure momentum functions Notice, by the way, that the 

momentum probability amplitude $(p) does not depend on time. 28 

Aside: Defining the Momentum Probability Amplitude. You may be wondering 
why I defined the momentum probability amplitude in (4.73) with an extra factor of 
l/Vh, rather than as simply A(p/h). Well, when we change variables from k to 
p, we have to somehow deal with the factor of 1/h that arises from the differential 
relationship dk = dp/h\ this 1 fh appears in the expression for the wave packet as 
an integral over momentum. By including a factor of l/Vh in the definition (4.73) 
and absorbing the other l/y/h in the prefactors in the Fourier transform relations 
(4.74) and (4.75), we preserve a useful property of the amplitude function: automatic 
normalization. 

Recall (§ 4.4) that, courtesy'of the Bessel-Parseval relation (4.51), an amplitude 
function A(k) determined from a normalized state function ^(a;,0) is automatically 
normalized with respect to integration over k [c./., Eq. (4.59)]. This means that 
in problem solving, we need normalize only ^(x, 0). With the definition (4.73) of 
<$>(p), automatic normalization is assured for the momentum probability amplitude— 
applying our change of variables to (4.59), we find 

/ OO poo 

\<S>(p)\ 2 dp= / = 1. (4.77c) 

■oo J —oo 

X 

The Interpretation of $(p); Born Again 

My appellation for 4>(p)—the momentum probability amplitude —strongly suggests an 
analogy to the position probability amplitude In fact, these functions are differ¬ 

ent ways of representing the same quantum state (§ 4.7) that highlight information about 
different observables: 

—» position ] 

- / \ > same quantum state 

<P(p) —> momentum J 

This analogy suggests that we interpret $(p) for momentum like we interpreted 
^(M) for position. To jog your memory, here’s the Born interpretation of #(z,<) as a 
position probability amplitude (Postulate II): 

Interpretation of ty(x,t): If the members of an ensemble are in a quantum state 
represented by the wave function ^(Zjt), then 

P{x , t)dx = |^(a;, t)\ 2 dx 

is the probability that in a position measurement at time t a particle will be detected 
in the infinitesimal region from x to x + dx. 


28 Some applications of quantum mechanics are based on a time-dependent momentum probability 
amplitude 4>(p, t). This function is defined, as you might have guessed, as the inverse Fourier transform of ? x 
the wave function at time t : 

1 f°° 

4>(p,*) = -— / n^t)e~ ipx,h dx 
V2irh J _ 00 

In practice, a time-dependent momentum amplitude is useful only in a very small number of cases—because the 
integral in its definition is quite ferocious. You can find a good discussion of these time-dependent momentum 
amplitudes in Elementary Quantum Mechanics by David S. Saxon (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1968). 


Sec. 4.7 (Not Quite) All About Momentum 133 



Now, a reasonable generalization of this idea to the momentum amplitude 4>(p), 
which represents the same quantum state as \F(z,f), is 29 

Interpretation of 4>(p): If the members of an ensemble are in a quantum state that is 
represented by a wave function with Fourier transform 4>(p) = ,F[ #(&,())], 

then 


P{p)dp = Mp)\ 2 dp = $*(p)$(p)dp 

is the probability that in a momentum measurement at time t a particle’s momentum 
will be found to have a value in the infinitesimal region from p to p -F dp. 


This generalization is the key to calculating probabilistic information about mo¬ 
mentum from a wave function t). And it buttresses the extension of our definitions 
of the statistical properties { x) and Ax to momentum, viz., 




Expectation Value of Momentum 


(4.78) 



A p = \/(A p) 2 

= [<( P -<P» 2 )f 

= V (p 2 ) - (p> 2 


Momentum Uncertainty 


(4.79) 


In (4.79), the expectation value of p 2 , which we need to evaluate the momentum 
uncertainty, is just 


( V 2 ) = [ $*{p)p 2 $(p)dp. 

J —oo 


(4.80) 


To illustrate the application of these extensions, I’ve gathered our results (from § 4.6) for 
a sample Gaussian wave function ^(x,0) and its Fourier transform, suitably expressed 
them in terms of x and p, and tabulated the whole thing in Table 4.1. 

Question 4-14 

Write the expressions for ^(x,0) and for 4>(p) in Table 4.1 in terms of Ax and A p 
respectively (instead of L). Your results show the important dependence of the Gaussian 
function and its Fourier transform on their (initial) widths—a feature of the Gaussian to 
which we’ll return in § 6.7. 


29 In more formal treatments of quantum mechanics, such as befits a graduate course. Postulate II is 
stated abstractly as a way to interpret the quantum state descriptor in terms of an arbitrary observable. To 
see how this goes, see Quantum Mechanics, Vol. I by C. Cohen-Tan noudji, B. Diu, and F. Laloe (New York: 
Wi ley-Interscience, 1977). 


134 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 






TABLE 4.1 POSITION AND MOMENTUM INFORMATION FOR A 
GAUSSIAN STATE FUNCTION WITH L = 1.0, x 0 = 0, AND p 0 = 0 


Position 

Momentum 

*< x ' o >=UlO 

M = o 

A x = L 

* w =(!£) ,/4 
(p) = o 

^=TL h 


Question 4-15 

We understand the existence of a center x 0 of a wave packet ty(x, t) as due to constructive 
interference in the superposition of complex harmonic waves that is the packet. For a 
symmetric packet this point coincides with the expectation value at t = 0, i.e., x 0 = 
(a?) (0). Provide a similar explanation of the existence of the center p 0 = hk 0 = (p) of the 
momentum probability amplitude. 

With this generalization to 4>(p) of the expressions for the expectation value and 
the uncertainty, we’ve developed machinery for calculating all we are permitted to know 
about momentum from this probability amplitude. And an impressive menu it is: We 
can work out the probabilities of each possible outcome of an ensemble measurement 
of momentum as well as statistical quantities that characterize all the results of the 
measurement: the mean value ((p)) and the extent to which individual results fluctuate 
about the mean (A p). Underlying this scheme are a few basic principles: the de Broglie 
relation p = hk, the Born inteipretation of a state function as a probability amplitude, 
and basic properties of waves. 

Still, the momentum probability amplitude $(p) is but one avenue to momentum 
information about a quantum state. There are others—which is good news, because 
in some applications, determining $(p) as the Fourier transfonn of the wave function 
^(zjO) is an algebraic nightmare. But fear not. Chap. 5 is in the offing. 


4.8 FINAL THOUGHTS: A WEALTH OF REPRESENTATIONS 

Our quest for a free-particle state function, which began in § 4.1 with the complex 
harmonic wave and culminated in § 4.2-43 with the wave packet, has taken us deep 
into the mysteries of momentum. But before I bring this observable center stage, in the 
next chapter, I want to reinforce the physics that underlies the mathematics of Fourier 
analysis—which led us into the world of momentum amplitudes in the first place. 

Underlying the application of Fourier analysis to the construction and deconstruc¬ 
tion of wave packets are physical principles familiar from Chaps. 2 and 3. Predominant 
among these is the omnipresent Principle of Superposition, which we saw reflected in 
our imagining a wave packet as a superposition of pure momentum states. Second, 
wave-particle duality is implicit in our use of the mathematics of waves to build and 
analyze functions that represent states of microscopic particles, as it is in our use of the 
de Broglie relations to interpret these states. And finally, uncertainty appeared naturally, 
almost as an afterthought, from our mathematical machinations. 

Sec. 4.8 Final Thoughts: A Wealth of Representations 135 




This subtle interplay of the mathematics of complex functions and the physics of 
the microworld is one of the marvels of quantum physics. No one really knows why this 
mathematical artifice of man’s mind happens to describe the real world so well; this is 
a question for philosophers and metaphysicists. 30 

The principal results of this chapter were the general form (4.29) of the wave 
packet, the Fourier transform relations (4.76) between the position and probability am¬ 
plitudes, and our finding (§ 4.7) that a state function yields (probabilistic and statistical) 
information about position or about momentum—depending on how we treat it. The 
algebraic procedures we use to extract position information from \£(a;,0) and momen¬ 
tum information from $(p) are identical; only the variables are changed. This powerful 
analogy is summarized in Table 4.2. 


TABLE 4.2 POSITION AND MOMENTUM REPRESENTATIONS OF A QUANTUM STATE 
OF A PARTICLE IN ONE DIMENSION 



Position 

Momentum 

Observable 

X 

P 

State function 

'I'(x.O) 

*(p) 

Probability density 

P(x,0) = |*(x,0)| 2 

p(p) = «p)i 2 

Expectation value 

(x) (0) = J ° e ^_ 'i'*(x, 0) x tf(x, 0 )dx 

(P) = f™ 00 &*(p)P$(p)<ip 

Uncertainty 

Ax = y/{{x - <x» 2 ) 

t> 

T3 

II 

<s 

< S S 

1 

to 


Ax = \J (x 2 ) - (x) 2 

A p= y/ (p 2 ) - (p) 2 





In more advanced formulations of quantum mechanics, the position and momentum 
amplitudes ^(rc,t) and 4>(p) are but two of an infinite number of “representations” of a 
more abstract state descriptor, the state vector. A state vector is not a function. Neither 
is it a vector in our geometrical space, -R 3 . Instead, it lives in an abstract vector space 
called a Hilbert space , where it is ruled by the mathematics of linear algebra. The state 
vector is usually denoted by the symbol | $(£)). 

Our wave function is the representation of this critter in (one-dimensional) 

“position space,” where the coordinate is x. Our momentum probability amplitude $(/?) 
is its representation in “momentum space,” where the coordinate is p. In fact, one can 
devise an infinite number of different representations of a quantum state. Each represen¬ 
tation corresponds to a different observable: there is an energy representation, an angular 
momentum representations, and so forth. 

This more abstract formulation was developed by P. A. M. Dirac. 31 Although 
later in this volume I’ll show you a wonderfully convenient shorthand notation Dirac 
introduced for integrals, I won’t show you quantum mechanics from his powerful but 
austere vantage point. At this stage, I want to keep matters as concrete as possible. 


30 But if you’re curious to read a physicist’s thoughts on the matter, you should read Eugene Wigner’s 
fascinating essay on the interconnections between mathematics and physics. It is reprinted as Chap. 17 of his 
collection Symmetry and Reflections (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1970). 

31 Dirac’s exposition of quantum mechanics, The Principles of Quantum Theory , 4th ed. (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1958)—which is now available in paperback—is a genuine classic that eventually should be 
read and re-read by every serious student of quantum theory. 


136 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 




Before we leave the matter of incarnations of the state vector, I want to make one 
final important point: 


Rule 

No representation of a state contains any more (or less) physical information than any other. 


This being the case, our decision to represent a state by ty(x, 0) or by <h(p) or by a 
function of some other variable becomes a matter of personal proclivity. In practice, the 
choice of representation is guided by expediency: we can usually find a representation 
that is particularly appropriate to the problem at hand ( i.e ., that saves us work). 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 

Waves 

You probably studied waves in a freshman or sophomore general physics course 
or in a separate course devoted solely to this topic. If not, you should have a look at 
one of the following excellent texts (arranged in order of increasing difficulty): 

1. French, A. P., Vibrations and Waves (New York: W. W. Norton, 1961) (available in paper¬ 
back). This book contains an especially good treatment of superposition in Chap. 2 and of 
interference phenomena in Chap. 8. 

2. Crawford, Frank S. Jr., Waves: Berkeley Physics Course , Volume 3 (New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1968). An exhaustive treatment of waves that emphasizes their applications to nearly 
every area of physics. For interesting discussions of dispersion and the group velocity of 
de Broglie waves, see Supplementary Topics 2 and 4. 

3. Elmore, W. C., and Mark A. Heald, The Physics of Waves (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969). 

Wave Packets and Uncertainty 

One of the most intriguing things to emerge from our discussions of wave packets 
was the uncertainty principle. For a more detailed analysis of the relationship between 
this important physical principle and the mathematics of state functions, look in nearly 
any graduate-level quantum book, such as 

4. Rabinowitz, A., Quantum Mechanics (New York: Elsevier, 1968), § 30 and 31. 

5. Bohm, David, Quantum Theory (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1953), § 10.9. 

The same A. P. French who wrote the book on waves I recommended above has also 
co-authored an excellent quantum mechanics text (at a slightly lower level than this one): 

6. French, A. P., and Edwin F. Taylor, An Introduction to Quantum Physics (New York: Norton, 
1978) (available in paperback). This whole book is readable, insightful, and worth your time; 
but I particularly recommend their discussion of wave packets (§ 8.7). 

Fourier Analysis 

Fourier series and integrals are so important to the mathematics of science and 
engineering that any “math methods” book worth its salt will contain an exposition of 
this topic, usually with lots of illustrations. A treatment that is particularly oriented 
towards students of physics, albeit at a rather advanced level, is the one in 


Annotated Selected Readings 137 




7. Mathews, Jon, and R. L. Walker, Mathematical Methods of Physics (New York: W. A. 
Benjamin, 1980), § 4.1 and 4.2. 

You can find a good summary suitable for undergraduates in 

8. Arfken, George, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 2nd ed. (New York: Academic Press, 
1970). Chap. 14 covers Fourier series, while § 15.2-15.6 discuss Fourier transforms; the 
latter section is devoted to the momentum representation. 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


Little Jack Horner 
Sits in a corner 

Extracting cube roots to infinity. 

An assignment for boys 
That will minimize noise 

And produce a more peaceful vicinity. 

—from A Space-Child’s Mother Goose 
by Frederick Winsor 


Exercises 


4.1 More Defects of the Monochromatic Harmonic Wave 

This exercise explores yet another reason why a plane harmonic wave cannot represent a state 
of a free particle. 

(a) Show that the phase velocity of a complex harmonic wave is given by Eq. (4.24). 

(b) Now, consider a very fast-moving particle of mass m —in fact, suppose the velocity v 
of the particle is near (but, of course, less than) the speed of light. Evaluate the phase 
velocity of the pure momentum state function for such a particle. Why is your result 
ludicrous and physically offensive? 

4.2 Momentum Measurements on a Chopped Beam: I 

Consider a pulse of free particles, the length of which is 2a. At time t = 0 the (normalized) 
state function of the particles in this “chopped beam” is 


f 0 


*(s,0)= { 


i 

y/2a 


—oo < x < —a; 
—a < x < a; 


^ 0 a < x < oo. 


(a) Determine the amplitude function A{k) for this state. 

(b) Write down an expression for the state function for this state for t > 0. (You 

may write your result in terms of an integral ready to be looked-up; do not try to evaluate 
this integral—it’s a mess!) 

(c) In an ensemble measurement of the momentum of the particles in the pulse at t = 0, 
what average value would be obtained? Justify your answer. 

Hint: Don’t immediately start calculating; think. 

(d) In the measurement of part (c), what value of p will most of the particles exhibit? Why? 

(e) What is the probability of obtaining the value p = hit {a in the measurement of part (c)? 
Hint: How important is the contribution of the pure momentum state with this value of 
p to the superposition that makes up the state function at t = 0? 

4.3 Momentum Measurements on a Chopped Beam: II 

Consider a free particle of mass m moving in one dimension with a speed v c. We shall 
write the state function for this particle as a localized wave packet. 


138 Chap. 4 An Illustrative Interlude 



(a) Write down the general form of the wave pacKei .; ; 

momentum states. Discuss how you would control the mixture of ? UK “To 
so that the function with momentum p„ = hk 0 is the most important constituent of 
wave packet and functions with |p| » Pa contribute negligibly to the stateJune ion 

(b) Evaluate the group velocity u gr of the wave packet and show that .1 is equal to the 
c“velocfty of the particle. * = dE/dp. Discuss the phys.cal significance of this 

result. 

Problems 

4.1 Construction of a Simple Wave Packet . h; nrnblem we shall 

The general form of a real harmonic wave is given by Eq. (4-5). *“ 

actually construct a wave packet by superposing a mte num er s following 

(a) Draw an accurate graph of the sum of six real h. rmomc waves with the follow, g 

wavelengths: 

\ z= 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, ;ind 2.0 cm. 

Take the amplitude of each wave to be 1.0 cm. Adjust the phase constants so that each 
harmonic wave satisfies the condition , 

/(io,to) = l° cin - 

. . r „ m c in 0cm (Note: You will probably find it 
Sketch the composite packet for |z| < lU.Ucm. 1 

convenient to choose xo = 0 and to =0.) . havc f om ied and the 

(W * «*“ 0f ’ he 

ton!;*: Notice that we do no, obtain a ** <*» ^ 

there are always several values of x where ate /■ numlier 0 f 0 i a ae waves 

phase. Several regions inevitably result when we supe^^ ^ ^ region 0 f enhancement. 

“ iih “ diffc,ing " ave 

, numbers, as in the following problem. 

x 4.2 Wave Packet Construction Can Be Fun o ... llf1p function The general form 

• Let's build a wave packet using * there w .... !(k) is the dispersion relation. (//. 

of the wave packet is given by Eqs. ( 4 . 29 ). where \ > 

this problem, we won't assume that particle is iei essai. > / 

Consider the amplitude tunclion 

f 0 k < ko ~~ 2 

m *> - 7b *-l*«*s *♦»**•• 

^0 A>/:o + 5 Afc - 

PART A Consider the initial time, t = 0. 

(a) Evaluate the state function ¥(x,0). 

(b) Evaluate the position probability density at - ■ conforms to the 

(c) Graph the probability denstty vs. x. ondsh™ the, ^ ^ ^ lh£ 

Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle AiAp approximation to the 

( d, il'pad (S a second curve sbowin, the probability-ensity «, - 0 

S;," W IdTdXyoomty'wh easier to graph the probability density as a 
function of the scaled variable x/(27r/Afc). 


Exercises and Problems 139 



PART B In Chaj. 6 we’ll investigate wave packet propagation. As a preview; cons der the 
behavior of the v ave packet of part A at times t > 0, using Eq. (4.29) as a starting joint, 

(a) To simplify the integrand of ^(i, t), expand u(k) in a Taylor series about k = k 0 , 
retaining on y terms through first order. Show that your result can be written 

u>(k) = Mo + Ugr (k - ko ), 


where w 0 = w(Jfc = k 0 ) and u Kr is the group velocity of the wave packet eval tied at 
k = ko. Unrer what conditions on A k is this approximation to u(k) valid? 

Him: The T ylor series expansion of a function f(x) about a point x = xo is 


f(x) = f(x 0 ) + (x - x 0 )f'{xo) 
(x - Xo) 7 


2 ! 


-f(x o)+ • + 


(n — 1)! 


/ (n ^(ac) + remaint er, 


where /'(xr is the first derivative df/dx evaluated at x 0 , etc. The usefulness jf this 
expansion is somewhat limited, because it can be applied only to functions that satisfy 
a rather den inding criteria: the derivatives of /(x) to all orders must exist ar must 
be finite. N netheless, the Taylor series is invaluable, and if you haven’t stud :d it I 
recommend :at you read § 16.3 of Calculus and Analytic Geometry, 3rd ed. by ieorge 
E. Thomas, \ (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1960). 

(b) Now, carry ut the integration over k and thereby obtain an explicit expression or the 
state functio and thence for the probability density P(x,t) in terms of x, t, i f , and 
A k. Verify iat your result agrees with that of part (b) at t = 0. How is P[x,t) elated 
to P(x — v gl ,0)? What does your answer to this question imply about the prop gation 
of this wave jacket? Does it retain its shape? 

(c) Let x,„»x de ote the position of the maximum of P(x,t). Write an equation or the 
time dependt ice of x mAX . 

(d) Now supposi that you are sitting on the x axis—say. at a point xi< > 0—w< :ching 
all the waves go by. Describe (in words or with sketches or both) what you sei, i.e., 
describe the probability density considered as a function of lime at a fixed position. 

(e) Let At denote the time interval that separates the arrival at x 0 of the central peak of 
■P(x, t) and the adjacent node. Show that this wave packet leads to the "energy-time 
uncertainty relation" AE At^sh. 

Remark: This extremely important problem reinforces the point made in this chapter: incer- 
tninty relations an inevitable consequences of the use of wave packets to represent st. tes of 
subatomic particle . More precise definition of the uncertainties involved would have led to 
the “precise” uncc lainty principles of this chapter and Chap. 11. 

<1.3 Coping with Comj lex Amplitude Functions 

Using Eq. (4.30), isc a stationary phase argument to show that the center of a wave >acket 
constructed from t complex amplitude function occurs at 


da 

X0 = ~dk 


4.4 Unmasking the Tr c Nature of a Wave Packet 
Consider the statu 'unction 


k=k 0 


0) h Now H; M] «'* ox 

(n) Nm mnll/o (it * (uiii'iloii, 

(h) Out'lvc the cetiuspomllng iinipllliido luiicilon A(k) m .?'|<| , (i»t 1 0)| and thereby dunon- 
strnie Unit this wave packet is actually a superposition of pmo mnuiciiltilit stales. 

Verify that your amplitude function is normalized. 


(c) 


... . .. 







(d) Sketch the real part of #( x>0 ) and the amplitude function A(k). [Choose convenient 
(but reasonable) values for A: 0 and L.] 

4.5 Fooling Around with Gaussians 

The extended example of § 4.5 concerned a Gaussian function (4.55), which is centered at 
x 0 = 0 with an amplitude function centered at k 0 = 0. In this problem, we’ll consider the 
often-used more general form (4.54). 

(a) Evaluate the expectation value of x for this state. 

(b) Evaluate the position uncertainty for this state. 

(c) Gaussian functions are widely used in the study of the physics of matter. Suppose that 
\J/(x,0) represents a particle of mass m moving in a gravitational field with potential 
energy 

V(®) = mgx. 

Evaluate (V( x )) for this state. 

(d) Repeat part (c) for a simple harmonic oscillator potential energy :; i.e., 

V{x) = ±mu>lx 2 . 

(e) Evaluate the expectation value of momentum for this state. 

Hint: To simplify your algebra, let the center of the wave packet, be zero for part 

(e). 

4.6 Momentum Information for the Particle in a Box 

In Chap. 4 we used Fourier analysis to determine momentum information from free particle 
wave functions such as the Gaussian wave packet of § 4.5. But we can also apply the 
mathematical analysis and physical reasoning of this chapter to quantum mechanical systems 
with non-zero potential energies. To illustrate, let’s consider the simplest single-particle 
system in which the particle is subject to external forces: the infinite square well. 

In various problems in Chap. 3, we probed the stationary states of this system. The 
wave functions that represent these states have the form 

¥ n CM) = ^ n {x)e~ xEnt,h . 


For a one-dimensional infinite square well of length L, the explicit form of these functions at 
t = 0 are 


fl'nfr.O) 


>/fcos (nirf) n 

yf sin (n7rf) n 


The (well-defined) energies of these states are 


E» 


A 2 

2mL 2 ’ 


1 . 3 . 5 .. .. 

2 . 4 . 6 .. .. 


(4.6.1) 


(4.6.2) 


which we can write in terms of the magnitude p„ of the linear momentum in the state n as 


with 


_ vl _ h 2 kl 

2m 2m 


P» 


— hk tt 



(4.6.3) 


(4.6.4) 


Thus far, we have analyzed several of these functions as position probability amplitudes — i.e., 
as sources of probabilistic and statistical information about position. For a change of pace, 
let’s look at these wave functions from a different point of view: as sources of momentum 
information. 


Exercises and Problems 141 



(a) Derive expressions for the momentum probability amplitudes <J>„(p) for the stationary 
states of the infinite square well. Consider even and odd values of n separately. Write 
your amplitudes in terms of p , L, n, and fundamental constants. 

Hint: To simplify the integrals you need to evaluate, first write the wave functions 
^„(rc,0) in terms of complex exponentials such as e iPnX ^ h . Evaluate the integral, then 
use the handy (but little known) trigonometric identity 

for n odd; 


sin (t ±x ) = { 


-H" 1 cos re 


sin re 


for n even 


(4.6.5) 


to put your momentum amplitude in a convenient form. Each amplitude should contain 
either the factor cos(pL/2h) or sin(pL/2/i), accordingly as n is odd or even. 

(b) Derive a single expression for the momentum probability density Pn(p) — ie-, an ex¬ 
pression that can be used for even or odd values of n. Graph the momentum probability 
density for n = 1, 2, 3, and 4. 

(c) The following quotation appears on p. 245 of the textbook Foundations of Modern Physics 
by Paul A. Tipler (New York: Worth, 1969): 


... if we measure the momentum of the particle in a box, we expect to find 
either p = +hk n or p = -hk u> and the two possibilities are equally likely. 


Discuss the validity of this statement. Under what circumstances, if any, is it correct? 

(d) Using your momentum probability amplitude $i(p), evaluate the expectation value of 
momentum and the momentum uncertainty for the n — 1 state of the infinite square well. 




142 


Chap. 4 


An Illustrative Interlude 



CHAPTER 5 


Observables in Quantum Physics 

A Pragmatist's Approach 

5.1 Observables for Macroscopic Systems 

5.2 The Trouble with Momentum 

5.3 And Now for Something Completely Different: The 
Momentum Operator 

5.4 The Operator Postulate 

5.5 The Mathematics of Operators: An Introduction 

5.6 Generalizing Our Expectations (and Uncertainties) 

5.7 Operators and the Correspondence Principle 

5.8 Final Thoughts: Operators in Momentum Space 



When I could find voice, I shrieked aloud in agony, 
“Either this is madness or it is Hell.” 

“It is neither,” calmly replied the voice of the Sphere, 
“it is Knowledge...” 

—A. Square, 

in Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions 
by Edwin A. Abbott 


In Chap. 3 we learned a new way to represent one of the basic elements of physical 
theory: the state of a system. Because the state descriptor of classical physics, the 
trajectory, is inapplicable to microscopic particles, we had to postulate a state descriptor 
more suited to the microworld: the position probability amplitude the wave 

function. 

The second class of basic elements of a physical theory consists of the mathematical 
representative of observables —the physical properties of a system. The idea of an 
observable is familiar: the brilliant yellow of a sunflower, the taste of a ripe apple, the 
rich odor of a compost heap—all are observables of everyday life. In physics, of course, 
we concentrate on more quantifiable observables, properties such as position, energy, 
linear and angular momentum. In physics, then, observables are physical attributes of a 
system that can be measured in the laboratory. 

In classical physical theory, we represent observables by real functions of time; 
these are the “property descriptors” of that theory. Underlying this way of representing 
observables is a concept so intuitively obvious that you may never have pondered it: 
when we think about the physical properties of a classical system, we assume that the 
system “possesses” them. This thinking is mirrored in the way we talk about classical 
observables, in such statements as “a billiard ball of mass 0.1 kg has a position specified 
by the coordinates x = 4.0 m and y = 6.2 m and an energy of 150 J.” 

Take a moment to think about this statement. It’s based (implicitly or explicitly) on 
an experimental determination of the properties it addresses (mass, position, energy). It 
reveals that our sense that a particle can be said to “have” (i.e., to possess) such properties 
presumes that the only incertitude infecting such a determination is experimental error. 
That is, we assume that well-defined, definite values of x, y, and E can be associated 
with the particle—regardless of whether we measure these properties, when we measure 
them, or even which ones we measure. The task of the experimental physicist is to 
measure them as accurately as possible. 

But this notion is not appropriate to the microverse, for in the absence of a measure¬ 
ment, a microscopic system does not necessarily have values of its physical properties —at 
least not in the classical sense of possession of properties. This disquieting notion first 
appeared in our discussion of the double-slit experiment (in Chap. 2): from the moment 
electrons leave the source until the instant before they arrive at the detector (where their 
positions are measured), they cannot be said to “have a position.” Rather, they are in 
a quantum state that allows an infinity of possible positions. One of these possibilities 
becomes actual when an electron arrives at the detector. 

This strange way of thinking about observables was also implicit in the wave 
functions we examined in Chap. 4. Particles in an ensemble whose state is represented 
by a Gaussian wave packet, for example, don’t “have” a position. Rather, their state 
encompasses an infinity of possibilities. We can think of these possibilities as latent in 
the state function until the observable, position, is actually measured, at which point one 

144 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



actual value is realized. The probability that one or the other possibility will be realized 
is calculated from the probability density |\I'(z,£)| 2 . 

The consequences of the latency of observables in an (unobserved) microscopic 
ensemble are profound indeed. As we’ll discover in § 5.2, it means that we cannot 
represent observables in quantum physics by the real functions of time familiar to us 
from classical theory. Instead, we must use mathematical instructions called operators— 
instructions that tell us how to extract information about observables from wave functions. 
The saga of operators in quantum mechanics begins in § 5.3, continues through this 
chapter, and is concluded in Chaps. 10 and 11. 

My first job is to try to convince you that the representation of observables in 
Newtonian mechanics, which we’ll review in § 5.1, isn’t applicable to the microscopic 
universe. To this end, I’ll focus (beginning in § 5.2) on a single, extremely important 
observable: linear momentum. Once I’ve shown you why the classical representation 
of momentum (p = mdx/dt) is incompatible with the physics of microscopic particles, 
I’ll introduce the quantum representation of this property, the operator p = —ihd/dx , 
in § 5.3. The use of this strange beast to represent momentum is the thrust of our 
next fundamental postulate (number III, if you’re counting), which I’ll present in § 5.4. 
To begin the process of getting acquainted with operators, we’ll examine some of their 
algebraic properties in § 5.5 and will test their compatibility with classical theory, in the 
appropriate limit, at the end of this chapter. 

A final note: I appreciate that the idea of representing a physically measurable 
quantity by a mathematical instruction probably seems mighty peculiar. So throughout 
this chapter, I’ll adopt a ruthlessly pragmatic stance towards the representation of observ¬ 
ables. Our goal will be to come up with devices that we can use to extract information 
about physical properties from wave functions. So think about operators as a quantum 
physicist’s tools—the quantum mechanical counterpart of a carpenter’s screwdrivers, 
hammers, and lathes. 

OBSERVABLES FOR MACROSCOPIC SYSTEMS 

Observables are the essence of physics. Experimental physicists measure the values 
of observables in the laboratory. Theoretical physicists calculate them—either by hand 
or, more likely nowadays, on a computer. To many classical physicists, the goal of 
Newtonian physics is to understand the nature of macroscopic systems through the study 
of their observables; classical mechanics is a tool kit for predicting the values of these 
observables from the trajectories of the particles comprising the system. 

For even the simplest physical system, it’s easy to think of lots of observables. 
Some are dependent on other observables; some are not. If, for example, we know the 
linear momentum p(i) of a particle, we can determine its kinetic energy T = p 2 /2m. 
But if we want to evaluate its potential energy V(r), we must know the position r. In any 
case, we can (in principle) measure the values of all the observables of a macroscopic 
system to infinite accuracy, secure in the knowledge that measuring one observable does 
not change the value of another (independent) observable. If, for example, we measure 
the position of a billiard ball, we do not thereby alter its kinetic energy (unless >ye are 
very maladroit). 

In classical physics, observables are represented by functions of time. To under¬ 
stand why this strategy doesn’t work for microscopic systems, let’s see why it does work 
for macroscopic systems. Essential to the Newtonian description of a classical particle is 


Sec. 5.1 Observables for Macroscopic Systems 145 



the premise that at any time the particle has a position and a linear momentum—and a 
host of other properties that can be determined from these observables. This means that 
we can ascribe (real) numbers—the values of these properties—to the particle, whether 
or not we measure them. These values usually change with time, so it makes sense to 
establish a correspondence between observables and functions : e.g., in one dimension 
we have 

CLASSICAL PHYSICS 


OBSERVABLE 


FUNCTION 

position 


x(f) 

momentum 


P(t) 

energy 


E[x(t),p(t)] 


This correspondence is the bedrock of Newtonian mechanics, the physical theory of 
macroscopic objects. 

Let’s see how this correspondence works for a couple of observables for a single 
macroscopic particle of mass m. The position of the particle at time t is specified by 
the values of three real numbers, the spatial coordinates. 1 The most commonly used 
coordinates are 

r = (x,y,z) rectangular coordinates 

r = (r, spherical coordinates 

Classical physicists define the other fundamental property descriptor, the linear momen¬ 
tum p (t), in terms of the trajectory, 

PW = (5,1) 

One reason the momentum is so important is that we can write all other classical ob¬ 
servables as functions of r and p. 

Some of these other observables are scalar quantities, like the total energy of a 
conservative system 


E = T(p) -1- V(r) 


(5.2 a) 
(5.2 b) 


For example, the total energy of a one-dimensional simple-harmonic oscillator with nat¬ 
ural frequency tu 0 is 


Remember that a coordinate system is just an artifice. In this book, we’ll use primarily rectangular or 
spherical coordinates. But practicing physicists work with lots of different coordinate systems, usually basing 
their choices on the symmetry properties of the physical system they’re studying. For example, a central force 
problem has spherical symmetry and hence is more easily (and more physically) described in spherical than in 
rectangular coordinates. We can define an infinite number of independent coordinate systems, but physicists 
most often use one of eleven special systems: those in which the “Helmholtz equation” 

V 2 V> - = 0 

can be separated. If you want to learn more about useful coordinate systems, see Chap. 2 of Mathematical 
Methods for Physicists, 2nd ed. by George Arfken (New York: Academic Press, 1970). If you want to have 
on hand absolutely everything you ever conceivably could need to know about coordinate systems, get a copy 
of Field Theory Handbook, 2nd ed. by P. Moon and D. E. Spencer (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1971). This 
awesome compendium of equations and facts is invaluable, although it isn’t the sort of thing you would want 
to take as light reading on a vacation. 


146 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 




(5.3) 


E = ^—h 

2m 2 0 

Others are vector quantities, like the angular momentum 

L = r x p. (5.4) 

All of these functions play a role in the dynamics of classical physics; in fact, 
the laws of physics are relationships between these representations of observables. For 
example, the laws of motion of classical physics can be written as 2 

^p = -VK(r) (5.5) 

d w ^ d 

—L = r x F = r x —p. (5.6) 

But if we try to use such functions in a physical theory for the microworld, we run 
into the conceptual obstacle I noted in the introduction to this chapter: A quantum system 
does not, in general, have a position, a momentum, an energy, etc., at a particular time. 

' So it makes no sense to represent the physical properties of such a system by functions 
of time. Does this mean that we must abandon the very idea of physical properties? 

Certainly not. The concept of position, for example, is certainly meaningful for 
a microscopic particle, for its position can be measured. The problem is that prior to 
such a measurement, the particle does not have a position in any meaningful sense. This 
is the essential difference between the position of a macroscopic particle and that of a 
microscopic particle: the position of a quantum particle is “latent.” It becomes “actual” 
only when someone measures it. This is true in general of the observables of quantum 
I physics: they manifest themselves only when measured, so we cannot meaningfully 
represent them by functions of time. 3 

To summarize our problem: A quantum physics worthy of the name must consist 
of physical laws. These laws must be expressed in terms of mathematical constructs 
that represent measurable quantities of the system they describe. But we cannot write 
these laws using the property descriptors of classical physics. To discover what sort of 
machinery we do use to represent observables in quantum mechanics, we must probe 
/ more deeply into the problems with the classical way of knowledge. So in the next section 
we shall concentrate on a single, very important observable: the linear momentum. 



5.2 THE TROUBLE WITH MOMENTUM 

What do we mean by the momentum of a microscopic particle? You may think I answered 
this question in Chap. 4, where I showed you how to use Fourier analysis to extract 
momentum information from a state function. But there is still a problem. 


2 To get through this book you won’t need to know classical physics at a very sophisticated level. But 
if you didn’t realize that Eq. (5.5) is an alternative form of Newton’s Second Law, F = rna, you probably 
should spend a little time with your favorite classical physics book—or one of the Suggested Readings at the 
end of this chapter. 

3 A fine discussion of “latent” observables can be found in Chaps. 8 and 17 of Henry Margenau’s superb 
book The Nature of Physical Reality: A Philosophy of Modern Physics (Woodbridge, Conn.: Ox Bow Press, 
1977). Margenau refers to the observables of classical systems as “possessed" observables. (I am indebted to 
Margenau’s writings on the meaning of physics for much of the philosophy in this book.) 


Sec. 5.2 The Trouble with Momentum 147 



Physics is a pragmatic science. Its fundamental quantities are introduced via oper¬ 
ational definitions —definitions that specify, implicitly or explicitly, a series of steps that 
can be implemented in a laboratory. In her excellent survey of the physics of matter, 
Ginestra Amaldi discusses this important underlying principle of physics 4 

... one should not introduce into physics magnitudes which cannot be measured by 
means of an experiment, an experiment which can be executed—or if it cannot be 
executed because of practical limitations of the apparatus available is at least in 
principle feasible. ... This principle... goes to the heart of the problem of knowledge. 

This principle is particularly germane to quantum theory, since the predictions of quantum 
mechanics are strictly limited to measurable quantities. In this sense, quantum mechanics 
is a narrowly pragmatic theory: it is mute about quantities we cannot study in the 
laboratory. 

Momentum Measurements on a Macroscopic Particle 

To illustrate the idea of an operational definition, which is crucial to understanding the 
trouble with the classical definition of momentum, let’s contemplate a measurement of 
momentum. Consider first a macroscopic particle of mass m moving serenely along in 
one dimension. The classical definition of the momentum of the particle is 

p(t) = m^-x(t). (5.1a) 

at 

This is an operational definition, as we can see if we rewrite the derivative in (5.1a) as a 
limit. Letting £1 and x 2 denote the positions of the particle at times t\ and £2 > we have 

p = m lim ———. (5.1b) 

y t2-t 1 t 2 ~tl 

Equation (5.1b) prescribes an operational procedure: we measure the position of the 
particle at two successive times (as close together as possible) and calculate p from 
Eq. (5.1b). Simple, right? Yes—if the particle is macroscopic. 

Momentum Measurements in the Microworld 

Now let’s think about applying this definition to microscopic systems. The argument I 
want to make is a little subtle, so follow closely. 

Consider an ensemble of microscopic particles whose state the instant before the 
first position measurement is represented by \£(rc, £ 1 ). Like the states we saw in Chaps. 3 
and 4, this one corresponds to an indeterminate position [Aa;(£i) > 0]. So before the first 
measurement, the situation of the particles in our ensemble is like that of the electrons in 
the double-slit experiment prior to their arrival at the detector: they do not have a value 
of position. 

At time £ 1 , we perform an ensemble measurement of position. For each particle 
in the ensemble, one of the possibilities latent in ^(rc, £j) becomes actual (e.g., spots 
appear). Therefore our measurement has changed the state of the particles in the ensemble 
from one in which the position was uncertain to ones in which the positions are definite. 

4 Ginestra Amaldi, The Nature of Matter: Physical Theory from Thales to Fermi (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1966), pp. 102-103, emphasis mine. 


148 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



Now, our definition (5.1b) calls for a second position measurement at time t 2 . How 
might we perform such a measurement? Well, we could start by selecting all particles in 
the initial ensemble that in the first measurement exhibited the particular value x\. (This 
collection of particles is a sub-ensemble all of whose members are, at time t\ t in the 
quantum state with definite position x = x\.) As time passes, the state of these particles 
will evolve into one with an uncertain position, so the second position measurement after 
even a short interval will yield a range of values. (We’ll explore such measurements 
in detail in Chap. 13.) We could pick one of these, call it x 2 (t 2 ), and calculate the 
momentum from (5.76). 

I hope this prescription makes you nervous; it’s fraught with logical problems. For 
one thing, we don’t know which of the positions exhibited at t\ —or, for that matter, at 
t 2 —to use in (5.76). You might suggest that we get around this difficulty by modifying 
this definition to use not particular values of position, but rather the expectation values 
(x) ( t\ ) and (x) ($ 2 ). This suggestion is insightful, but it doesn’t resolve a second, far 
more serious problem: the measurement at t\ changed the state of the particles in the 
ensemble. So the subsequent behavior of the particle is not what it would have been had 
| we not performed the first measurement. In fact, the change of state induced by the first 
| measurement alters the results of the second measurement. 

So if we use (5.76), we don’t really know what we’re calculating! It’s certainly not 
“the momentum of the particle.” It’s just a number: the difference between an unmeasured 
and a measured position divided by a time interval and multiplied by a mass. But this 
number does not describe a property of the particle itself. 

In a nutshell: the formal problem with applying the classical definition of momen¬ 
tum to an ensemble of microscopic particles arises because it is impossible to measure the 
position of such particles without altering their state. This vicissitude is inevitable, be¬ 
cause prior to measurement, the particles do not have a position or a momentum. (Once 
again we see that it makes no sense to ascribe trajectories to microscopic particles.) 

That is, we cannot represent the observable momentum by mdxfdt , and we must 
[ resist the temptation to think about it in classical terms. Since the classical definition of 
! momentum cannot be implemented for microscopic systems, this definition is, in quantum 
mechanics, meaningless. 5 

Limitations of the Fourier Road to Momentum 

“Wait just a minute,” you cry. “I remember that in Chap. 4 we calculated all sorts of 
information about the momentum of a free particle: the momentum probability distribu¬ 
tion, the mean value of the momentum, the momentum uncertainty. Are you saying that 
this information is meaningless?!” 

Certainly not. It’s not momentum information, but rather the classical definition 
of this quantity that loses significance in the quantum realm. 

“But,” you continue, “it seems mighty strange that in Chap. 4 we could calculate 
information about an observable that we cannot even define.” 

It does indeed. But the reason is that in Chap. 4, I deftly dodged the question 
of what we mean by momentum by basing the development on the de Broglie relation 
p = hk —in effect, I snuck up on momentum via functions of the wavenumber. In 

5 For ihis reason, velocity is not considered a fundamental attribute of microscopic particles. In classical 
physics, the velocity of a particle (in one dimension) is just v = dx/dt, but in quantum mechanics, velocity 
is defined as v = p/m. 


Sec. 5.2 The Trouble with Momentum 149 




/ 


\ 



particular, we used this relationship to convert the Fourier transform of the wave function, 
A(k) = ^(x,0)] = -^= r tf(x,0 )e- ik *dx, (5.8) 

V ^7T 7-00 

into the momentum probability amplitude 


•«-;*■*( D- 


(5.9) 


Once we adopted the Born interpretation of this function, we could calculate various 
probabilistic and statistical quantities relating to momentum, such as the expectation 
value 



$*(p)p<t>{p)dp , 


(5.10) 


by simply generalizing our definitions for position. 

The disadvantage to this route to momentum infonnation is that it’s circuitous and 
often awkward. Were Eq. (5.8) our only recourse, then in every application we would 
have to evaluate A(k). The algebra involved in this little chore is often horrendous. 
So for practical purposes, if no other, we need a more direct way to extract momentum 
information from state functions. 

But there’s another reason for looking again at momentum: relying on the de 
Broglie relation to avoid the question of how to define momentum is really a cop-out. 
The lack of a definition of so fundamental an observable is a gaping hole in the edifice 
of our theory. 

So in the next section we’ll tackle this problem head on. Once we’ve devised a 
mathematical tool for extracting momentum information, our strategy will be to adopt 
this tool as the operational definition of momentum in quantum mechanics. Knowing 
how to represent the momentum (and position) of microscopic particles, we can write 
down tools for other observables. And thus shall we arrive at Postulate III. 


5.3 AND NOW FOR SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT: 
THE MOMENTUM OPERATOR 


In a contemplative fashion, 

In a tranquil state of mind, 
Free of every kind of passion 
Some solution we shall find. 

—from The Gondoliers 
by Gilbert and Sullivan 


When I say “we extract momentum information from a state function,” I mean, of course, 
probabilistic or statistical information —for that is all nature will allow. We know from 
Chap. 3 how to calculate such information for position—for example, the mean value of 
position is the expectation value 

(a;) = f V^(x, t) dx. (5.11) 

J —oc 


150 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



But suppose we want the mean value of the momentum of a particle in the state 
and are forbidden (or, more likely, unable) to take the Fourier route of Chap. 4? 
We could reason by analogy, speculating that the mathematical form of ( p ) might be the 
same as that for ( x)\ i.e ., 

(p) = f V*(x,t)pV(x } t)dx. (5.12) 

J —oc 

But now what do we do? What do we insert in (5.12) for pi To proceed further, we 
need a “momentum extractor”—a mathematical device that represents p in such a way 
that we can evaluate expressions like (5.12). Evidently, our momentum extractor should 
be expressed in terms of x, the variable of integration in (5.12). 

A Momentum Extractor for a Pure Momentum State 
Function 


To simplify our quest for a momentum extractor, I want to consider for a moment a very 
simple function: one of the pure momentum functions 

»,,(*, t) = (5.13) 

v 27 m 

that make up the wave packet 

^OM) = / ${p)V p (x,t)dp. (5.14) 

J — oo 

In particular, consider the pure momentum function 

= (5.375 x 10 2 m~ 2 ) exp{z[(4.9 x 10 12 m _1 )a; - (5.8 x 10 18 sec _1 )£]}. (5.15) 


Our mission, should we decide to accept it, is to extract the value of the momentum p 
from this function. [No peeking; it’s not fair to just read the value of p off Eq. (5.15).] 

What sequence of operations will, when applied to the pure momentum function 
(5.13), produce the value of p. Well, since p appears in the argument of an exponential, 
we might get it out by differentiating with respect to x, viz., 

A e i( P x-Et)/h = *P e i( P x-Ei)/h (5 16) 

dx h 

Notice that we must use a partial derivative in (5.76), because the function ^ p (x ,7) 
depends on two independent variables, x and t. 

The first derivative almost does the job: this operation produces the momentum 
multiplied by i/h. To get just the value of p, we should operate on (^(z, t) with 
(k/i) d/dx, to wit: 

t r\ 

-t — typixyt) = pV p (x,t). (5.17) 

Eureka! We have discovered an operator—a mathematical instruction—that ex¬ 
tracts the value of momentum from a pure momentum function. I’ll denote this operator 
by p and, because I prefer my factors of >/—I in the numerator, use l/i = — i to write 
its definition as 


Sec. 5.3 The Momentum Operator 151 



momentum operator 


(5.18) 


y 


/ 



In words, this operator instructs us to do the following: 


p differentiate with respect to x , then multiply by -ih. (5.19) 

Throughout this book, I’ll put little hats on operators to distinguish them from the ob¬ 
servables they represent. 

Question 5-1 

Use the tool defined in Eq. (5.18) to extract the value of the linear momentum from the 
pure momentum state (5.15). 


A Leap of Faith: The Momentum Operator for an Arbitrary 
State 

The little demonstration above—and Question 5-1—shows how to use the operator 
—ihd/dx to extract momentum information from a pure momentum state function. But 
such a function corresponds to a definite momentum and is not normalizable; at best it 
can represent a quantum state only approximately. So how do we represent momentum 
in calculations involving the arbitrary wave packet (5.14)? 

The essential assumption of this chapter, which we’ll make formal in the next 
section, is the obvious answer: use —ihd/dx to represent the observable momentum 
for any quantum state in one dimension. This assumption establishes the following 
correspondence: 

QUANTUM PHYSICS 


OBSERVABLE 


OPERATOR 

momentum 


P 


Aside: The Momentum Operator in Three Dimensions. For a particle in three 
dimensions, the momentum is represented by an operator with three components, p x , 
p y , and p z . These quantities are defined just like (5.18), i.e., 

d „ d „ d 

= ~ lh lTx = p - = - ,h (Tz- 

Such an operator is, sensibly, called a vector operator. The vector operator for linear 
momentum can be conveniently written in terms of the gradient operator V as -ihV. 

A Mathematical Aside: On Eigenvalue Equations. Our basic assumption is that 
p can be used to determine momentum information about any state. In general, the 
effect of p on a function ^(a;, <) is to produce some other function of x and t. But 
something special happens when p operates on a pure momentum state function: 

p Wpix, t) = pty p {x, t). [for a pure momentum state only] (5.20) 

Equation (5.20), which is not a general relationship, has a special mathematical form: 
an operator, in this case p, acting on a function equals a number times the function. 
Equations of this form are called eigenvalue equations. We’ll encounter such equa¬ 
tions repeatedly in our journey through the wonderland of quantum theory and, in 
Chap. 11, will examine them in their own right. 


152 


Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 





Question 5-2 

/ Show that when p acts on the function 


/ i \ i/4 

*<*-°> = (sz») e " 


z 2 /(4L 2 ) 


the result is not a constant times ^(x.O). This means that particles in a state represented 
by this function do not have a well-defined value of the momentum (see Chap. 11). 

Back to the Expectation Value of Momentum 


Now we can answer the question I left dangling after Eq. (5.12): how can we evaluate 
the expectation value of momentum from the wave function ^(.r,f)? Answer: merely 
insert the operator p in Eq. (5.12), viz.. 


(p) = f '&*(x,t)p'ft(x,t)dx 
J — oo 


-oo 

rOO 


= jy^hi) 


(5.21 a) 


(5.21/7) 



^*( 2 , t) [ -ih— ) 'h(x ) t)dx. 
ox/ 

Equation (5.21 h) instructs us to carry out the following steps: 

1 . differentiate with respect to re; 

2 . multiply the result by —ih and then by ty*(x,t)\ 

3. integrate the resulting integrand with respect to x. 

Perform these three steps, and voila, you have calculated the average value that would be 
expected in a measurement at time t of the linear momentum on an ensemble of particles 
ifi a state represented by Z ). 6 Let’s carry out these instructions for a specific case. 

Example 5.1. Expectation Value of Momentum for the Infinite Square Well 

In Example 3.2 we looked at some of the wave functions for a single particle with a very 
simple potential: a symmetric finite square well. In various problems in Chaps. 3 and 4, we 
consider a simple variant on this potential, the infinite square well 

{ -oo <x<-±L\ 

0 -\L<x<\L\ 

oo < x < oo. 

Notice that this potential is infinite everywhere except inside a region of length L, where it 
is zero. In Chap. 7 we’ll study in detail the quantum states of this system, but for now I 
want to consider one particular state for purposes of applying the momentum operator to it. 

Like all bound systems, the particle in an infinite square well has a state of minimum 
energy. This state is called the ground state, and in this state the energy is well-defined (i.e., 
for this state AjE? = 0). The wave function for the ground state at t = 0 is zero outside the 
region -~L < x < 5 L , and inside this region is proportional to a simple cosine function: 

0 -00 < x < -\L\ 


^ 1 (re, t) = < 


Vt cos (*i) -\ L <*<\u 


(5.22) 


\L < x < 00 . 


°In Chap. 7 we’ll discover special quantum states called stationary states for which ( p ) is independent 
of time. But in general, the expectation value of any observable depends on time. 


Sec. 5.3 The Momentum Operator 153 



yj 

Question 5-3 

What is the expectation value of position for this state? Does your answer imply that the 
position of a particle in this state is definite— i.e., is the position uncertainty for this state 
zero? Why or why not? (Think, don’t calculate!) 

Now, suppose that at t = 0 we measure the linear momentum on an ensemble 
of these systems in the ground state. To figure out the average value we’ll find in the 
measurement, we insert the wave function (5.22) into our operational expression (5.21) 
for the expectation value of momentum, viz., 


(p) = / 'S>* l (x,0)p'k 1 {x,0)dx 


(5.23 a) 


2 I M [ L ' 2 
— {—in) / cos 

L J-L/2 




dx. 


(5.23/7) 


[Note very carefully the limits of integration in (5.23/7). Be sure you understand why 
for this system these limits are -L/2 and L/2, not —oo and oo.] We can evaluate the 
integral in (5.23 b) either by brute force or by thought. By now, I suspect you can guess 
which strategy I prefer: we think. 

Looking at the integrand in (5.23/7), we notice immediately that one of the functions 
in it has definite parity : the cosine function is even with respect to the midpoint of the 
infinite square well, x = 0. Therefore the first derivative of this function, 


d_ 

dx 


r ( x \ 

TT . 

( x \ 

COS 7T — 

= — — sin 


L \ l)\ 

L 

V lJ 


(5.24) 


is odd with respect to x = 0. And we all know what the integral over a symmetric 
interval of the product of an even and an odd function is, right? Right: the integral is 
zero. Ergo, 


(p) = 0 (ground state of the infinite square well). (5.25) 

Question 5-4 

Evaluate (p) by explicit integration (just this once). Isn’t it better to think before you 
integrate ? 

Of course, we could have used the methods of Chap. 4 to calculate (p), first 
determining the momentum probability amplitude for the ground state of the infinite 
square well, 


*(P) = 




^i (re, 0) e~ ipx ! h dx , 


(5.26) 


then substituting this function into 


( p ) = f <r(p)p$(p)dp. 

J —oo 


(5.27) 


But this procedure involves a lot more work (as you discovered if you worked Prob¬ 
lem 4.6). 

Before leaving this example, I want you to take a moment to ponder the physical 
consequences of the fact that in the ground state of the infinite square well, (p) = 0. 
This result does not imply that the momentum in this state is well-defined, i.e., it does 


154 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



not mean that in the ensemble measurement, all members yield the same value of p. Be 
sure you understand this point. 

Question 5-5 

/ The energy of the ground state of a particle in an infinite square well is well-defined—its 
value (see Chap. 7) is 


Now, V = 0 inside the box, so in the region where the state function is non-zero, the energy 
and momentum are related by E = T = p 2 /2m. Does the fact that the energy of the state 
is well-defined contradict the fact that the momentum is not sharp? If not, explain why hot. 
(If so, we are in big trouble.) 

For future reference, here’s the handy mathematical property we used to subdue 
the integral in Example 5.1. Mark it well: 


7 — [even function of x] = odd function of x 
ox 

Q 

—— [odd function of a;] = even function of x 
ox 


Momentum: Final Ruminations 


I don’t want to leave you with the wrong impression: in this section, I have not actually 
derived the momentum operator . 7 But I have argued that in quantum theory we must 
treat momentum differently than we do in classical physics and that it is reasonable to use 
the operator p = -ihd/dx to determine momentum information from a state function 

*0M)- 

In fact, we are in the happy situation of having two ways to calculate the expectation 
value of momentum. We can calculate ( p ) from ^(x,t) directly, a la Eq. (5.21), or 
we can evaluate the momentum probability amplitude $(p) = ^[^(^, 0 )] and use 
Eq. (5.27). If we execute the required algebra correctly, both procedures will give the 
same answer, for they are entirely equivalent. In a few cases, the Fourier road is the 
easier of the two. But for most problems, evaluating the momentum amplitude is such a 
pain that we prefer to use the momentum operator. 

But enough about momentum. Lots of other physical properties are of interest 
in physics—energy, angular momentum, etc. Practitioners of Newtonian mechanics can 
represent these observables by functions of position and momentum and (perhaps) time. 
But we need to know how to represent observables in quantum physics. In the next 
section, we’ll unearth a simple procedure for devising a quantum mechanical operator 
for any observable. 

different authors sometimes choose a different set of postulates in their formulation of quantum me¬ 
chanics. Some sets of postulates permit the derivation of the operator identification p = —ihd/dx from 
Fourier analysis of ^(.x, f), rather than postulation of this correspondence. Still other authors set up their pos¬ 
tulates so they can obtain this correspondence from the Correspondence Principle (see § 5.7). Time permitting, 
you should sample several different ways of laying out quantum theory; e.g., Chap. 3 of Introductory Quantum 
Mechanics by Richard L. Liboff (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1980); Chap. 4 of The Quantum Physicists and 
An Introduction to Their Physics by W. H. Cropper (London: Oxford University Press, 1970); and Elementary 
Quantum Mechanics by David Saxon (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1968). 


Sec. 5.3 The Momentum Operator 155 




5.4 THE OPERATOR POSTULATE 


In § 5.3 we established the fundamental correspondence between the observable mo¬ 
mentum and the mathematical operator p: in the quantum theory of a single particle 
in one dimension, p = -ihd/dx represents momentum. The third postulate of quan¬ 
tum mechanics, the topic of this section, is a generalization of this idea to an arbitrary 
observable. 

The Position Operator 

The importance of the observable position in physical theory is comparable to that of 
momentum. In classical physics, we can write the functions that represent observables in 
terms of these observables, and in quantum mechanics we can express (most) operators 
in tenns of the operators that represent position and momentum. In § 5.3, we developed 
the operator p = -ihd/dx for momentum, and in Chap. 3 used the operator for position 
(without so identifying it). Let’s review. 

Look again at the expression for the expectation value of position, 

(x) = / V*(x t t)xV{x,t)dx. (5.30) 

J — oo 

What does this expression tell us to do? Well, the first step in calculating (x) is evaluating 
x^(x y t). This is an instruction (aha!): it says “multiply ^(a;, t) by x” 

This suggests that we define the position operator x as 



x multiply by a;. position operator ( 5 . 31 ) 

This definition established a second correspondence, 


OBSERVABLE 


OPERATOR 

position 


X 



Formally, we indicate the use of the position operator in Eq. (5.30) for (x) by just 
replacing the x between V*(x, t) and $(z,f) by x , as 

(x) = f '&*(x i t)x'tf(x,t)dx. (5.32) 

J —oo 


You may be wondering why I didn’t define x in Chap. 3? It seemed to me that 
introducing so formal a definition so early in our introduction to quantum mechanics 
might appear to be a sadistic complication. But now we are far enough along to see the 
usefulness of introducing the position operator: since any classical observable can be 
written as a function of x and p, we can use the operators x and p to translate classical 
observables into quantum mechanical operators. That is precisely what we are about to 
do. 


Generating Operators 

Consider an arbitrary observable. I’ll denote a generic observable by the symbol Q and 
will write the function that represents this observable in classical physics Q(t ) if I want 
to emphasize the time dependence and Q(x,p) otherwise. To obtain the operator that 


156 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 






represents Q in quantum mechanics, we just replace the variable re in Q{x,p) by the 
position operator x and the variable p by the momentum operator p, 8 



CLASSICAL OBSERVABLE 


QUANTUM OPERATOR 

Q{x,p) 


Q(a-,p) 


In practice we merely insert p = -ihd/dx everywhere in Q(x,p) that p appears. (What 
should we insert everywhere that x appears?) To summarize: 



X 


X 

.. d 

V — —ifi— 

/ 

V 





dx 



That’s all there is to it! 9 

Example 5.2. The Energy Operator for the Simple Harmonic Oscillator 

To apply our new tool, let’s work out the energy operator for a simple hannonic oscillator 
(SHO): a microscopic particle of mass m with natural frequency oj 0 and potential energy 


V(x) = | mu>lx 2 


(5.34) 


The first step in developing a quantum mechanical operator for any observable is to write 
down the classical function that represents that observable. 

In classical mechanics, the function that represents the total energy is the Hamiltonian 
i/(r, p). For a single particle with a velocity-independent potential energy, the classical 
Hamiltonian is just the familiar function 10 


%W,P(<)1 = r(p) + V(r,t). 

The operator that represents the total energy of a physical system in quantum mechanics is 
also called the Hamiltonian. It is represented by the symbol Ti. 

To determine the Hamiltonian of a microscopic simple hannonic oscillator, we start 
with the classical function 


H{x,p) = T(p) + V(x) (5.35) 

P I 2 2 

= 2 ^ + 2 mWoX - < 5 - 36 > 

8 This procedure will handle nearly any operator. But in a few cases, the operator it produces isn’t 

unique. In others, the operator it produces fails to satisfy a vital property called Hermiticily (see Chap. 11). 

Quantum mechanics has (advanced) machinery to deal with either instance, and such cases are so rare that you 
needn’t worry about them. But you should be aware of them. 

0 Well, almost all. If the state functions we’re working with are written as functions of position (and 
time), Eqs. (5.33) will generate appropriate operators. But in some problems we prefer to represent quantum 
states by functions of momentum—or of some other observable. In such cases, we simply translate the operators 
x, p, and Q into the appropriate “representation” (see § 5.8). 

10 Formally, the Hamiltonian is defined in terms of the Lagrangian of the system and the conjugate 
coordinates and momenta of the particles that comprise the system. This function is used in Hamilton's 
formulation of classical physics, an alternative to Newton’s theory. For an introduction to classical Hamiltonian 
mechanics, see § 7.12 of Classical Dynamics of Particles and Systems, 2nd ed. by Jerry B. Marion (New York: 
Academic Press, 1970), or § 6-14 of Introduction to the Principles of Mechanics by Walter Hauser (Reading, 
Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1965). At a more advanced level, you should peruse the beautiful development in 
Chap. VII of Mechanics, 2nd ed. by L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 
1969). There are close, subtle, and provocative connections between the Hamiltonian formulation of classical’ 
mechanics and Schrodinger wave mechanics, as you’ll see if you read Chap. 8 of the fine text Introduction to 
Quantum Mechanics by R. H. Dicke and J. P. Wittke (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1960) 


Sec. 5.4 The Operator Postulate 157 





To generate the Hamiltonian operator for the simple harmonic oscillator we just apply the 
prescription (5.34) to each occurrence of x and p in this function, viz., 

H = T + V = ¥- + mwfa' 2 . (SHO) (5.37) 

2m 2 

Notice that the kinetic energy operator 

r? 

T = 4— kinetic energy operator (5.38) 

2m 

is independent of the potential and so applies to any single-particle one-dimensional system. 

Now, suppose we want to use the Hamiltonian operator (5.37) to evaluate, say, the 
mean value of the energy of an ensemble of simple harmonic oscillators in a state represented 
by a known wave function vp(a;,£). By analogy with our expressions for (x) and (p), we 
write 

(E) = f V*{x,t)H'H(x ) t)dx. (5.39) 

J — OO 


The first step in evaluating this integral is working out the effect of the operator H on 
ty(a;,t). So we write H in terms of x by inserting the explicit forms of x and p into (5.37): 




1 2 « 2 
+ —mw 0 x . 


(5.40) 


To proceed to the next step, we must evaluate (-ihd/dx) 2 ty(x,t). 

Depending on your mathematics background, you may or may not know how to do 
this, how to act on a function with the square of an operator. In case you don’t know, I’ll 
defer the rest of this example until I’ve shown you a little about operator algebra (§ 5.5). 
To be continued. 

The Operator Postulate on Stage 

To close this section, I want to make formal the scheme we have deduced for representing 
observables. This postulate is on a par with Postulate I, which specified how to represent 
the other class of elements of quantum theory: states of a system. Postulate III specifies 
how to represent the observables of a system: 



/ 



The Third Postulate of Quantum Mechanics 

In quantum mechanics, every observable is represented by an operator that is used to obtain 
physical information about the observable from state functions. For an observable that 
is represented in classical physics by the function Q(x,p), the corresponding operator is 
Q{x,p). 


A final note: In Part IV, where we probe deeper into the formalism of quantum me¬ 
chanics, we’ll learn that not just any mathematical operator can represent an observable. 
Like state functions, the class of observables of use in quantum mechanics is restricted. 
Just as the functions that represent quantum states must be complex and normalizable, so 
must the operators that represent observables satisfy a condition called Hermiticity (see 
Problem 5.1). 

Moreover, some operators in quantum mechanics do not correspond to classical 
observables. Indeed, in examining microscopic systems, we’ll meet some observables, 

158 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 








such as spin, that have no classical counterpart. And we’ll make the acquaintance of 
operators, such as the parity operator, that can’t be written as functions of x and p. All 
this is yet to come. 

Operators: A Historical Aside. The idea that the laws of quantum physics could 
be formulated in terms of operators was first propounded by Max Bom, whom we 
met in Chap. 3, and Norbert Weiner, a mathematician and child prodigy. In late 
1925, Born visited MIT, where he gave a series of guest lectures on atomic structure 
and solid state physics. There he renewed his acquaintance with Weiner, who was 
an instructor in mathematics. At this time Schrodinger had not published his wave 
mechanics, and Bom and the rest of the physics community were using a theory, 
due to the ubiquitous Werner Heisenberg, in which observables were represented by 
matrices. 11 

Weiner, who received his Ph.D. at the ripe old age of 18, was already an expert 
on “the operator calculus,” which he learned while using Fourier analysis to unravel 
the complicated electrical oscillations that make up information in telephone lines. 12 
Listening to Bom lecture about Heisenberg’s ideas, Weiner realized that these ideas 
could be usefully expressed in the language of operators. This realization sparked a 
collaboration that ultimately led to a formulation of quantum theory that, although 
incomplete, was more powerful and more widely applicable than matrix mechanics— 
especially for Bom’s beloved atomic collision problems. 

Unfortunately, Bom and Weiner did not fully develop their theory, and hence 
their contribution did not have the impact it might have. Although they used an 
operator p for linear momentum, they did not spot the vital connection p = -ih d/dx. 

And their timing was rotten, for within a few months (in 1926) Erwin Schrodinger 
stunned the physics community with his wave mechanics, which immediately became 
the formulation of choice. Born has commented on his oversight: “I shall never 
forgive myself, because if we had done this, we would have had the whole wave 
mechanics at once, a few months before Schrodinger.” 13 

Born and Weiner applied their theory successfully to the microscopic simple 
harmonic oscillator (Example 5.2) and to uniform motion in one dimension. And, 
although their work was almost immediately overshadowed by Schrodinger’s, their 
idea of using operators in quantum mechanics was here to stay. A host of physicists 
further developed operator mechanics—notably, Paul A. M. Dirac—and their work is 
ijow an essential part of the repertoire of every practicing quantum mechanic. 


5.5 THE MATHEMATICS OF OPERATORS: AN INTRODUCTION 

We need education in the obvious 
more than investigation into the obscure. 

—Oliver Wendell Holmes 

Norbert Weiner, who with Max Born devised the operator postulate, learned operator 
mechanics as part of his training as a mathematician. And this subject is properly 
considered a branch of mathematics. In the 18th century, differential calculus was all the 


11 Heisenberg’s theory is still in use today, under the appropriate name matrix mechanics. For an 
introduction to this alternate approach to quantum mechanics, see Matrix Mechanics by H. S. Green (The 
Netherlands: P. Noordhoff, Ltd., 1965). 

12 Weiner was a fascinating man, and if you are at all interested in the lives of the shapers of contempo¬ 
rary physics, look up his autobiography, which he modestly (and appropriately) entitled I Am A Mathematician: 
The Later Life of a Prodigy (Garden City, N. Y.: Doubleday, 1956). 

13 Quoted in The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, Volume 3 by J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg 
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982). 


Sec. 5.5 The Mathematics of Operators: An Introduction 159 



rage. But many mathematicians were uncomfortable with the “metaphysical implications” 
of a mathematics formulated in terms of infinitesimal quantities (like dx). This disquiet 
was the stimulus for the development of the operator calculus. 14 

Two 18th-century mathematicians, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716) and 
Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1736-1813) founded the operator method. But the formal theory 
that Bom and Weiner adapted to quantum mechanics was developed later by three men: 
Francois Joseph Servois, Robert Murphy, and George Boole. You may have heard of 
Boole for his “Boolean algebra”—a theory based on operator methods in which Boole, 
who was nothing if not ambitious, tried to explain all of mathematics. 

To anyone who has studied calculus, operators are familiar critters. Indeed, the es¬ 
sential elements of calculus are operators: the derivative d/dx and the integral f x • • • dx 1 . 
(The centered dots in this integral represent the function being integrated; e.g., sins' in 
f x sins' dx '.) 

An operator, then, is just an instruction, a symbol that tells us to perform one or 
more mathematical acts on a function—say, /(s). The result is another function #(s), 
which may be a constant. For this reason, the effect of operators is sometimes denoted 
by the symbol i-». Here are two equivalent ways of writing the effect of an operator Q 
on a function /(s): 

g(x) = Qf(x) <=> Q : /( x) «-> g(x). 

The essential point about operators is that they act on functions ; we might think of 
operators as analogous to active verbs in English, with functions as their objects. 

The instruction we are told to perform may be as trivial as “multiply f(x) by the 
constant 4,” e.g., 

4 f(x) = 4 f{x), (5.41) 

or as complicated as “integrate f(x) along a specified contour in the complex plane.” A 
sampler of operators is presented in Table 5.1. 


TABLE 5.1 A SAMPLER OF OPERATORS 


Symbol 

Instructions 

Example 

3 

multiply by 3 

3/(*) = 3/(*) 

A 

differentiate once 

Af(x) = f(x) 

B 

form complex conjugate 

Bf(x) = r(x) 

C 

destroy 

C f(x) = 0 

D 

expand in Taylor series 

1 H n f 

D f{x) = V°° n - x n 

> Z-m=0 n [ fj x n 


Working with Operators 

Every quantum mechanic must be able to manipulate, combine, and simplify expressions 
containing operators—expressions such as xp — px. To flawlessly manipulate such 

14 For a history of the development of the operator calculus, see the article by Salvatore Pincherle in 
Encykl. d. math. Wiss. lilt, Part 2 (issue no. 6, March 1906, pp. 761-817). 


160 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 




expressions, you must remember that like surgeons, operators must operate on something. 
An operator without a function is like a verb without an object. You’re much more likely 
to do your operator algebra correctly if you will follow this rule: 


Rule 

Always write operator expressions and equations in terms of a general function f(x). 


Suppose, for example, we want to simplify the operator expression xp — px (as 
we shall in Example 5.4). Our first step should be to write this expression in terms of a 
generic function f(x), as xpf(x) - pxf(x). Then we try to simplify. 

In such manipulations, it’s also important to keep in mind that 15 

_ 

Rule 

Operators act on everything to their right unless their action is constrained by brackets. 


Thus, when we write pfi{x)f 2 (x), we mean p[fi(x)f 2 (x)] t not \pfi(x)] times f 2 (x). 
(Do you see the difference?) 

/ 

Operator Algebra 

Mastering the algebra of operators isn’t particularly difficult. But you must be wary lest 
you inadvertently slip into patterns of thought familiar from your experience with the 
mathematics of numbers and functions. Operators are not just funny-looking numbers or 
functions: the algebra of operators is, in some important respects, quite different from 
that of numbers or functions. 

To appreciate the distinction between operators and other mathematical species, 
let’s consider a simple example. Let the symbol A represent a real number , say A = 3. 
Suppose that for some reason we need to evaluate the combination Af(x)g(x). Does 
the position of A in this expression make any difference? 

No—real numbers commute with functions; e.g., 3 f(x) = f(x) 3. So we can write 
the expression Af(x)g(x) in several equivalent ways: 

Af(x)g(x) = f(x)Ag(x ) = g(x)Af(x) (5.42a) 

3 f(x)g(x) = f(x)3g(x) = g(x)3f(x) (5.426) 

This trivial example illustrates the principle of commutativity of real numbers. 

Does this principle apply to operators? To find out, let’s try one—say, the simple 
operator A = d/dx. The first expression in (5.42a) is 


lj There is an important exception to this rule. The infinitesimal in an integral operator is part of the 
instruction. For example, dx‘ in A = J ■ • • dx' is part of the integration operator, so 


A f{x) = 



f(,x')dx'. 


This is one reason mathematicians sometimes write the integrand after the infinitesimal, as f x dx' 


Sec. 5.5 The Mathematics of Operators: An Introduction 161 





(5.43a) 


Af(x)g{x) = ^ f(x)g(x) 

= /(x)£ 9 (x) + g(x)-^f(x). (5.43b) 

And the second is 

f(x)Ag(x) = f{x)^g{x). (5.44) 

Except in certain special cases (5.44) is not the same as (5.43b). (And for A = d/dx , 
the third expression, f(x)g(x)A is meaningless.) The moral of this trifling exercise is: 


WARNING 

Relations that are “obvious” from our experience with real numbers and functions 
may be incorrect when extended (without thought) to operators. 


How to Cope with Sums, Differences, and Products 

In this book, you’ll only need mastery of the simplest features of the algebra of operators. 
The simplest operator manipulations—addition and subtraction—rarely pose problems. 
As you can readily verify, two operators Q i and Q 2 can be added or subtracted according 
to the familiar rules 


(< 3 i±< 32 ) f(x) = Qif(x)±Qif(x) 
= ±Q 2 f(x) + Qif{x) 


addition 

subtraction 


(5.45) 


Mathematicians refer to this property as distributivity. 

More interesting is what happens when we form the product of two (or more) 
operators. The product Q\ Q 2 cannot be treated like the products of two numbers or of 
two functions. Instead, the rules of operator algebra assign to the product combination 
the following meaning: 


Rule 

The product of operators implies successive operation. 


For instance, to evaluate Qi Qzfix), we first act on f(x) with Q 2 to form a new 
function of x —call it g{x). We then act on g(x) with Qi to form the desired function. 
That is, we can break this product down into two operations : 


h(x) = Q i Q 2 f{x) 


Q 2 ' f(x) g(x) 
Qi:g(x) i-» h{x) 


Notice that I’ve used the mathematician’s symbol r-» to vivify the active role of the 
operators Q\ and Q 2 . 

This little analysis demonstrates the following rule: 


162 


Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 





/ . 


So we could write the product considered above by defining yet a third operator, 
Q 3 , that is equivalent to the product, viz ., 16 

Qz = Q1Q2 and h{x) = Q 3 f(x). (5.46) 

Please pay special attention to the meaning of operator products. This is the facet of 
operatp/algebra that most often trips up newcomers to quantum mechanics. So etch the 
ab^vfe rule in your memory. 

Example 5.3. The Kinetic Energy Operator Revisited 

Using the simple rules of this section in hand, we can finish Example 5.2. There we set out 
to develop an expression for the Hamiltonian of a simple harmonic oscillator in terms of 
operators and functions of x. We developed the following expression for this Hamiltonian 
[Eq. (5.40)]: 


Rule 

The product of two operators is a third operator. 



” = 2 t (~ ih £) + \ m < 5 '«) 

To complete our labors, we must simplify the first term in (5.47), the kinetic energy operator; 
i.e., we must work out the effect on a function f(x) of the square of the momentum operator 
P ■ 

According to the above guidelines, the wrong way to evaluate p 2 is to treat it as 
though p were a function, i.e., 

The right way is to follow instructions: operate on f(x) twice in succession with p: j 

p 2 f(x) = ppf(x) (5.48 a) ! 

= /(*)■ (5-486) j 

Ergo the form of the kinetic energy operator we use to act on functions of x is 


r=!l = . 

h 2 d 2 

2 m 

2m d x 2 ' 


kinetic energy operator 


With this operator, the desired Hamiltonian (5.47) is simply 
_ h 2 d 2 1 2-2 

n ~ ~2mOx* + 2 m<V ° X ‘ [one-dimension simple harmonic oscillator] 


(5.49) 


(5.50) 


In Chap. 9, we’ll study the state functions of the simple harmonic oscillator that we obtain 
from this Hamiltonian. 


1G Two operators Q and R are said to be equivalent if for all functions f(x), they satisfy 
Qf{x) = Rf(x). equivalent operators 


Sec. 5.5 The Mathematics of Operators: An Introduction 


163 





/ 



The Commutator: A Sneak Preview 

What are commuting operators? Ones that drive to work? No, no. Two operators Q i 
and Q -2 commute if they obey the simple operator expression 


Q\ Q2 = Q2 Qi- 


commuting operators 


(5.51) 


Ponder this equation carefully. If it seems to you that any two operators should obey 
it, then you’re thinking about operators as though they were real numbers, and are in 
trouble. 

The critical feature of Eq. (5.51) is that it’s an operator equation. Since operators 
must operate on functions, it follows that 


Rule 

To be valid an operator equation must hold for an arbitrary (well-behaved) function /(re). 


This rule is the key to verifying valid operator equations—and exposing invalid 
ones. I can’t overemphasize this point: if an operator equation is true, it must hold for 
any function. But if it fails for a single function, then it’s false. 

If, for example, you are investigating two operators Q 1 and Q 2 and can find one 
function for which Q1Q2 f(x) £ Q2Q1 /(®), then you have proven that Qi and Q 2 do 
not commute. 

Let’s get specific. Consider the operators 

g, = l (5.52) 

Q 2 = x. (5.53) 


Let these guys act on the function /( x) = e 2x . What happens? To find out, first evaluate 
Q1Q2/M, then evaluate Q 2 Q X f(x). 

You should have found that the functions that result from these operator products 
differ depending on the order in which Q\ and Q 2 act, i.e., 

QiQue 2 * itQiQie 2 *. (5.54) 


The fact that Eq. (5.51) does not hold for the single function f(x) = e ix is enough to 
prove that the operators d/dx and x do not commute, i.e., 


d ^ d 
Tx x * x Tx 


(5.55) 


As always, my examples have a moral. This one is: 


WARNING 

The order in which the operators operate is vital; never assume that two operators 
commute. Always check their commutativity. 


164 


Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 






Mathematical Aside: Commutativity of Functions. Non-commutativity isn’t a 
problem for functions such as f(x) and g(x) or real numbers (such as a and 6), since 
the algebras of real numbers and of functions are commutative, i.e.. 


a b = b a 
f{x)g{x) = g{x) f(x) 


(5.56 a) 
(5.56 b) 


Question 5-6 

Dream up some pairs of operators that do commute. Now come up with some pairs that do 
not commute. 


Of all the mathematical peculiarities of operators we’ve examined, their commu¬ 
tativity (or non-commutativity) is most important physically. In Chap. 11, we’ll unearth 
a remarkable connection between this property of operators and uncertainty relations 
involving observables. As a sneak preview, I’ll close this section with an important 
example. ^ 

Example 5.4. Do Position and Momentum Commute? 

Consider the operator Q = xp - px. Were we to encounter this operator in a quantum 
mechanics problem, our first thought would be to try to simplify it—to reduce it, if possible, 
to a simpler operator. 17 But before tackling this chore, we’d write its definition in terms of 
a generic function, as 

Qf(x) = xpf(x) -pxf(x). (5.57) 

We begin the task of simplifying Q by writing Eq. (5.57) in terms of x by inserting 
into this equation explicit forms for p and x , viz., 

Qf{x) = x [“^^/(s)] ~ [*/(*)] (5.58a) 

= - ihx l +ih £[ xf ^}- < 5 - 58fc) 

Now we expand the first derivative in the second term in Eq. (5.586) to give two terms, 
one of which cancels the first term in (5.586). This manipulation leads to a delightfully 
simple form for Q: 

Qf(x) = ihf(x). (5.59) 

To write (5.59) as an operator equation, I must introduce the identity operator I, 
which does very little: 

i f(x) = f(x). identity operator (5.60) 


Voila: 



xp — px = ihl 


(5.61) 


We have discovered the curious fact that operating on a function with this particular com¬ 
bination of x and p is equivalent to multiplying the function by a constant. Amazingly, this 
fact leads to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle! (Isn’t quantum mechanics fantastic!) 
But to see how, you must wait for Chap. 11. 

17 Q is a critter called a commutator (Chap 11). In particular, xp — px is the commutator of position 
and momentum, which is denoted [x,p]. 


Sec. 5.5 The Mathematics of Operators: An Introduction 165 




5.6 GENERALIZING OUR EXPECTATIONS 
(AND UNCERTAINTIES) 

What do we do with operators once we have found them? Well, one common application 
is the calculation of expectation values and uncertainties for various quantum states. 
You now know how to use Postulate III to design the operator Q that represents whatever 
observable Q we’re interested in. So if I give you the wave function that 

represents such a state, you can evaluate these two pieces of statistical information about 
the state from the following straightforward generalizations of familiar equations: 18 



t)Qty(x, t) dx 


expectation value of an arbitrary observable (5.62) 



A Q = y<(Q-<Q)) 2 } 

= sfW) - W- 


uncertainty of an arbitrary observable 


(5.63) 


To illustrate the use of these expressions, let’s return to the ground state of the infinite 
square well (Example 5.1). 


Example 5.5. The Momentum Uncertainty for the Ground State of the Infinite Square Well 

The wave function of this state, ^i(x,0), is given in Eq. (5.22). In Example 5.1, we 
discovered that the expectation value of momentum for this state is (p) = 0. So in a 
measurement of the momentum perfonned at t = 0 on an ensemble consisting of a huge 
number of identical particle-in-a-box systems, each in the ground state, the average of the 
values we’d get is zero. To predict how these values are distributed about this mean, we 
must calculate the momentum uncertainty 


Ap = \/<P 2 > - <P> 2 , 
which for this state simplifies to 

Ap = yj (p 2 ) for a state in which (p) = 0. 

So to determine the momentum uncertainty, we need only evaluate 


<'■>-£ 

= -h 2 


ty*(x,t)p 'P(x.t) dx 

roc d 2 

J ^*(x,t )^2 V(x>t)dx. 


(5.64) 

(5.65) 


(5.66a) 
(5.66 b) 


This isn’t hard. For the wave function ty|(x,0) in Eq. (5.22) we have 


fi2 2 1 
- h - L J 

! COS 1 7T — J 

-L/ 2 V LJ 

i 2 ( x \ 

l^ cos ri)J 

dx (5.61a) 

27r 2 /i 2 

V J 

rL/2 

j cos 2 | 

-L/2 

( X> 

VL; 

| dx. (5.61b) 


18 We could justify these expressions formally via extensions of the arguments used in Chap. 3 [c.f., 
the discussion surrounding Eq. (3.40)]. I should note, however, that some authors treat Eq. (5.62) as a part of 
Postulate III. 


166 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 





Note carefully that 1 changed the partial derivative with respect to x in (5.66) to an ordi¬ 
nary derivative, because x is the only variable in Eqs. (5.67)—and watch those limits of 
integration! 

Now, can we use parity to simplify the integral in (5.67/?)? Well, the integrand has 
definite parity, but it’s even—not odd. So the integral isn’t equal to zero. We can, however, 
write this integral as 


/ L/2 rL/2 

cos 2 ^7T^J dx = 2 J cos 2 [njj dx. (5.68) 


/-L/2 

We can now integrate by parts. If we define 


x 

u = 7 r Z’ 


we can write Eq. (5.67b) in terms of it as 

(p 2 ) = 2j jf* 

A trip to the nearest integral table yields 


l r /2 

* I 


cos 2 u du. 


r- r/2 

Jo ' 


cos 1 udu = —. 

4 


(5.69) 


(5.70) 


(5.71) 


And, using this integral in (5.70) and taking the square root of the result, as prescribed by 
(5.65), we find the momentum uncertainty 


a 7rft 

Ap = t 


(ground state of infinite square well). 


(5.72) 


Since A p > 0, the momentum of particles in the ground state is not sharp. So in an 
ensemble measurement, various members yield different values of p. These values are 
distributed about the mean momentum for this state, (p) = 0. 

'/ lr) (J C 

Example 5.6. The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle—Verified. 

With very little additional work, we can for the first time test the Heisenberg Uncertainty 
Principle. According to this fundamental tenet of quantum physics, the product of the 
position and momentum uncertainties for any quantum state of any system must be greater 
than or equal to h/2. We just evaluated A p for a particular quantum state of a particular 
system: the ground state of the infinite square well. So let’s evaluate Arc for this state and 
thence the uncertainty product. 

The position uncertainty is no more difficult to evaluate than was the momentum 
uncertainty. From the form of the wave function (5.22) we see that in the region where it’s 
non-zero (inside the “box” ) this function is a simple cosine. This function is symmetric 
about x = 0, so the expectation value of position in this state is zero: 



(x) = / 'I'KxjO)® 'l'i(x,0)dx = 0. 


(5.73) 


Question 5-7 

Argue from the fact that the probability density |^i (x, 0)| 2 is symmetric and from the 
physical meaning of (x) that this quantity must be zero. Now carry out the integral 
in (5.73) explicitly and prove that your argument is correct. 


Sec. 5.6 Generalizing Our Expectations (and Uncertainties) 167 



This being the case, the position uncertainty simplifies to 


Arc = y/(y). (5.74) 

So all we need do now is evaluate the mean value of x 2 , 

x 2 ) = | y +W2 * 2 cos2 (»f) dx - (5.75) 

A second implementation of integration by parts [a \h. Eq. (5.69)] yields (x 2 ) = 0.0327 L 2 , 
whence the position uncertainty is 

Arc = 0.1808 L, (5.76) 

Question 5-8 

Fill in the steps leading to Eq. (5,76). 

Now we can evaluate the uncertainty product: 

Arc A p = 0.57ft. (5.77) 

Sure enough, for the ground state of the infinite square well, this product is greater than 
0.5ft, which verifies the prediction of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. In practice, 
we don’t often bother to substantiate this principle (which we’ll prove in Chap. 11). But 
a verification like Eq. (5.77) is a good way to check your algebra in the evaluation of 
uncertainties. Consider this a hint. 


Aside: A Discouraging Word about Uncertainties. Evaluating uncertainties for 
observables other than position and momentum usually involves pretty formidable 
algebra. Suppose, for example, that you want to evaluate the mean value of the 
energy of a particle in the infinite square well. 




(5.78) 


To be sure, formally this task poses no problems. The two expectation values are just 


(E) = f 

<* 2 > = / 


'I'* (x, t) H ^(x, t) dx 
V*{x t t) ii 2 y{x,t)dx. 


{5.19a) 

(5.79ft) 


Inside the box V = 0, so the Hamiltonian simplifies to the kinetic energy operator 
T. Since the wave function is zero outside the box, these expectation values are just 
the finite integrals 


(E) (t) 
(£ 2 >«) 



't!*{x,t)f'lr(x,t)dx 
^*(x,<)f 2 ^(x,<) dx. 


Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



But look at these integrals. The expectation value doesn’t look too bad: 

f L/ 2 

(E)(t)= / 

J-L/2 Zm 

r L/ 2 / fi2 o2 \ 

• ^ I “aSSi? >*<*•*>*■ 


=/>4 


But to calculate the uncertainty A E we must evaluate 

r L/2 


/■ 7 / i \ 

{E2)= 


For most wave functions, evaluating p 4 ^(a;,i), if possible at all, is quite arduous — 
it’s certainly not the sort of thing you would want to do unless you absolutely had to. 

Yet, all is not lost. There are many ways to skin the proverbial cat. 19 In Part IV 
we’ll develop diverse strategies for evaluating expectation values and uncertainties, 
strategies that are more clever (and much easier) than brute force application of the 
equations in this section. 

/ 

5.7 OPERATORS AND THE CORRESPONDENCE PRINCIPLE 

One of the most curious things about the operators that represent observables in quantum 
mechanics is that they seem to have no clear physical relationship to the functions of time 
that represent observables in classical physics. To be sure, there is a formal relationship 


between the two: the operator Q that represents an observable Q is related to the classical 
function Q[x{t),p{t)\ = Q(x,p) via the replacements 


x -<=> x = x and p •<=>• p = —ih —. 

dx 

Still, we intuitively suspect that if, as we required in Chap. 1, quantum physics is to be 
consistent with classical physics, then when applied to a state of a macroscopic system, 
the operator Q should behave like the function Q(t). This consistency requirement is 
the essence of the Correspondence Principle (see § 1.2): 



Rule 

The Correspondence Principle: In the classical limit, the laws of quantum mechanics 
must reduce to those of Newtonian Mechanics. 


But precisely how does this principle work, in practice? That is, what is the nature 
of the physical correspondence between the quantum mechanical operator Q and the 
classical function Q{t)l Well, here’s an example: if we compute the value at time t 
of the property Q for a macroscopic system from the operator Q and from the function 
Q{t ), we should get the same number to within any measurable accuracy. (Remember 
that the statements of quantum physics are limited to what can be measured in the lab.) 
In order to see if this consistency requirement is satisfied, we must look closely at the 
meaning of such evaluations—and that is the thrust of this section. 


19 Cat lovers: please don’t write letters. This is a metaphor. I love cats. 


Sec. 5.7 Operators and the Correspondence Principle 169 




The Classical Limit—And How to Get There 

The key phrase in the statement of the Correspondence Principle is “the classical limit.” 
You probably have a feeling for what this phrase means: an electron is not a classical 
system; a racquetball is. But to understand the relationship between classical and quantum 
physics, you need to understand the precise meaning of this limit. 

Many quantum mechanics texts define the classical limit in a way that, to new¬ 
comers, often sounds absurd. Consider, for example, the following statement of the 
Correspondence Principle: 20 “In the limit where h -► 0, the laws of Quantum Mechan¬ 
ics must reduce to those of Classical Mechanics .” 

Think about this statement. What could it possibly mean? We know that h is an 
immutable fundamental constant of nature; its value isn’t zero, it’s 1.0546 x 10 34 J-sec. 
(If h were zero, this book, its author, and its readers would not exist.) 

The statement of the classical limit as “the limit in which h -* 0” is not wrong; 
it’s just a little terse. To understand it, we must recall the limitation of quantum physics 
to measurable phenomena. That is, quantum effects—which follow from the fact that 
fo ^ o_are of no significance unless they can be measured. So what the quoted state¬ 

ment really means is the classical limit is the limit in which all quantum effects aie 
immeasurably small. 

Example 5.7. The Classical Limit and Uncertainties 

To illustrate this essential idea, let’s ponder an aspect of quantum theory that is blatantly 
non-classical: the limitations on knowledge we see reflected in the Heisenberg Uncertainty 
Principle As A p > h/2. I want to apply this principle to an ensemble of macroscopic 
systems, to show you that for such systems, quantum mechanical uncertainties are not 
measurable and hence are irrelevant— i.e., in this sense, a macroscopic system behaves 
according to our classical expectations. 

Suppose we want to simultaneously measure the position and velocity of an ensemble 
of identical particles of mass m. Whether the particles are microscopic or macroscopic, 
these measurements are subject to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principles. To conveniently 
express this restriction, I’ll define a velocity uncertainty as 

Av = — Ap (5.80) 

m 

and write the uncertainty principle as 

AxAv>--. ( 5 - 81 ) 

“ 2 m 

Now, suppose the particles are macroscopic, say, racquetballs with m = 0.1kg. This 
large mass makes the product (5.81) very small, 

A.r Ai> « 10" 33 . 

True, it’s non-zero—but we can’t verify this fact experimentally 
experimental) purposes, the uncertainty product is zero: 

Ax Av « 0 [for macroscopic particles]. (5.83) 


(5.82) 

S 

. So for all practical (i.e., 


20 From Quantum Mechanics by Albert Messiah (New York: Wiley, 1966), p. 214. 


170 


Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



The point of this example is that although the uncertainty principles of quantum mechanics 
do apply to macroscopic particles, they in no way limit the accuracy of a measurement of 
position and velocity. 

The demonstration in Example 5.7 can be put on a more rigorous footing by 
writing down a wave packet that represents a state of the particles in the ensemble and 
calculating from this function the uncertainties Ax and A p. One finds that the individual 
uncertainties Ax and A p are negligibly small, i.e ., 21 

Arc«0 and A p «0 [for macroscopic particles]. (5.84) 

Equation (5.84) makes perfect sense. At any time, a macroscopic particle has a 
well-defined value of rc and of p , so we should be able to measure these observables to 
any desired precision (allowing for experimental inaccuracy). In the language of quantum 
physics, this implies that quantum indeterminacies Arc and A p should be immeasurably 
small. As they are. 

Statistical Quantities in the Classical Limit 

We’ve seen that in the classical limit, quantum mechanical uncertainties become negli¬ 
gible. I want you to think for a moment about the following question: what should the / j 
expectation value ( Q) of an observable Q reduce to in this limit? / 


*** Pause while reader ponders *** 


A clue to the answer is to be found in the definition of ( Q ). Remember that, 
like the uncertainty, the expectation value is a statistical quantity ; i.e., it describes the 
results of an ensemble measurement—a series of identical measurements performed, at 
the same time t, on identical systems in the same state. If the state can be described by 
classical physics, all members of the ensemble exhibit the same result (ignoring, for the 
moment, experimental error): the value of the function Q(t) at the measurement time. 
(That’s why the standard deviation of these results, A Q, is zero.) So the average of 
these results, the expectation value (Q), is Q(t). We conclude that in the classical limit, 
(Q) ( t ) should become equal, to any measurable accuracy, to Q{t). 

Aside: The Classical Limit of a Microscopic System. I don’t want to leave you 
with the impression that “the classical limit” is limited to macroscopic particles. For 
some microscopic systems, all quantum mechanical uncertainties are immeasurably 
small for certain states. These particular states, therefore, behave according to the 
laws of classical physics. For example, highly energetic states of a microscopic 
simple harmonic oscillator behave in this fashion, because (Chap. 9) for such states 
all quantum effects are too small to be measured. The point is that the classical 
limit may pertain either to all states of a macroscopic system or to certain states of a 
microscopic system. 

We have discovered an extremely important key to how the Correspondence Prin¬ 
ciple works: 

21 For details, sec § 12-7 of Elementary Quantum Mechanics by P. Fong (Reading, Mass: Addison- 
Wesley, 1960) and Chap. 8 of Introduction to Quantum Mechanics by R. H. Dicke and J. P. Wittkc (Reading, 
Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1960). 


Sec. 5.7 Operators and the Correspondence Principle 171 



Rule 

The element of quantum theory that in the classical limit corresponds to the classical function 
Q(t) is the expectation value of the operator Q with respect to the wave function V(x,t) 
that represents the state. 


That is, we get from the state functions of quantum mechanics to the classical limit 
via the statistical quantities (Q) and A Q: 


(Q) (t) - 

- >Q(t) 

the classical limit 

A Q(t) 

-> 0 


the classical limit 


(5.85) 


The Rules of the Game 

In this chapter, we’ve explored the elements of quantum theory that represent physical 
properties, operators, and how they are related to the corresponding elements of classical 
theory, functions of time. What we have not investigated are the laws we construct from 
these elements. But the Correspondence Principle demands that the laws of quantum 
physics reduce to those of classical physics in the classical limit. How, you may be 
wondering, does this work? 

Here’s a preview of a result we’ll prove in Chap. 11. Once we have studied the 
time dependence of state functions and expectation values, we’ll easily verify that (p) 
and ( x) obey the provocatively familiar equation 

(p) = ( x ). (5.86a) 

You can probably see already what this equation translates into when we take the classical 
limit. In this limit, the expectation values in (5.86a) behave according to Eq. (5.85), i.e., 

{x) C t )-♦ x(t) (5.86 b) 

the classical limit 

(p> (<)-* (5 - 86e) 

the classical limit 


So the quantum mechanical law (5.86a) reduces (to within the accuracy of any measure¬ 
ment) to the familiar equation 


(p) = m 37 ( x ) - 

at the classical limit 


p{t) = m — x{t). 



Isn’t that satisfying? 

172 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 





5.8 FINAL THOUGHTS: OPERATORS IN MOMENTUM SPACE 

i / 

1/ Let’s review the situation, 

Solve the complicated plot. 
Quiet calm deliberation 
Disentangles every knot. 

—from The Gondoliers 
by Gilbert and Sullivan 

With this chapter, we’ve devised ways to represent the two essential elements of physical 
theory: states and observables. And we’ve begun assembling a dictionary of the “property 
descriptors” of quantum physics: observables (see Table 5.2). 


TABLE 5.2 A PARTIAL DICTIONARY FOR 
OBSERVABLES AND CORRESPONDING OPERATORS 


Observable 

Operator 

Instructions 

position 

X 

multiply by x 

d 

momentum 

P 

" h Tx 

Hamiltonian 

n 

T+V 

kinetic energy 


h 2 a 2 

T 

2 m dx 2 

potential energy 

V 

multiply by V(x , t) 



In the examples of this chapter, we used operators to evaluate expectation values 
and uncertainties. But operators tell us far more than just the values of statistical quanti¬ 
ties. In Chap. 11, we’ll examine the eigenvalues of an operator. In quantum mechanics, 
these numbers have a profound, startling physical significance: the eigenvalues of an 
operator are the only values that can be obtained in a measurement of the observable that 
operator represents. Nothing remotely like this occurs in classical physics. 

The systems we’ve investigated have consisted of a single particle in one dimension, 
so I wrote the operators in Table 5.2 in terms of the position variable x. But we can 
generalize all of them to more complicated systems. For instance, the kinetic-energy 
operator for a single particle in three dimensions is__ 


f =2 i (£+#+*!) 

2m 

- (&_ 

2m \da; 2 + dy 2 


+ 


dz 2 


(5.88a) 


(5Mb) 


(5.88c) 


The position variables x, y, and 2 appear explicitly in Eq. (5.88c), which we therefore 
call “the kinetic energy operator in the position representation.” 

But the position representation is but one of a multitude of “representations” used in 
quantum mechanics. The idea of alternative representations of the elements of quantum 


Sec. 5.8 Final Thoughts: Operators in Momentum Space 173 




theory is not new: in § 4.8, I remarked that the position probability amplitude ^(z.O) is 
but one of many ways to represent a state at t = 0. Another, entirely equivalent descriptor 
for this state is the momentum probability amplitude 4>(p). We call this function the wave 
function in the momentum representation. 

As you’ll discover in your next course in quantum mechanics, the various rep¬ 
resentations of a state we use are actually explicit functional forms of a more abstract 
entity called a state vector. This beast, which I’ve mentioned before, lives in an abstract 
vector space called a Hilbert space. Similarly, you’ll meet operators in Hilbert space, 
where they too have an abstract form. 

Operators, like state descriptors, can be written in a variety of representations. In 
this chapter, we’ve worked exclusively in the position representation, where x is the 
independent variable. In this representation the operators for position and momentum 
have the form 

x = x p = [position representation]. (5.89) 

ox 

In the momentum representation , where p is the independent variable, these operators 
look like (see Pblm. 5.6) 

x = ik— p = p [momentum representation]. (5.90) 

dp 

In the momentum representation, these operators act on functions of momentum— 
the momentum probability amplitudes $(p)—not on functions of x. For example, we 
evaluate the expectation value of position at t = 0 from $(p) as 

(s)(0) = [ <!>*{p)x${p)dp (5.91 a) 

J —oo 

ih^\<S>(p)dp. (5.91 b) 

All representations are equivalent, in the sense that they all lead to the same 
physical information about states and properties. The choice of representation is up to 
you. But you needn’t be concerned about this choice now; except for these occasional 
end-of-the-chapter rambles, I’ll work in the position representation. 

There is, after all, lots left to do in this representation. For example, we’ve got to 
figure out how to describe the evolution of a quantum state. On to Chap. 6. 



ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 
Operator Mathematics 

Several useful texts on the mathematical properties of operators are available. Most 
of the topics covered in these books are somewhat advanced, and we won’t get to them 
until Chap. 10. Nonetheless, here they are. My personal favorite—and an excellent 
investment at the price—is 

1. Jackson, J. D., Mathematics for Quantum Mechanics (New York: W. A. Benjamin, Inc., 
1962) (available in paperback). See especially § 4.2. 

A useful book at a more advanced level is 

174 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



2J Jordan, Thomas F., Linear Operators for Quantum Mechanics (New York: Wiley, 1969). 

Chap. II contains an introduction to operators, and Chap. IV discusses advanced features of 

operator algebra. 

In addition to these books, most texts on mathematical methods for physicists 
include discussions of basic operator mathematics, and nearly any undergraduate quan¬ 
tum mechanics text includes bushels of exercises involving operators. Of the latter, I 
particularly recommend 

3. Gillespie, Daniel T., A Quantum Mechanics Primer (New York: Intext, 1970), Chap. 2. 
And, for general insight into operators and their role in quantum mechanics, you can’t 
do better than 

4. / Dirac, P. A. M., The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 

1958), Chap. 2. 


EXERCISES AND 


PROBLEMS 


The tasks of filling in the blanks 
I’d rather leave to you. 

—The Mikado, 
in The Mikado 
by Gilbert and Sullivan 


Most of the problems for this chapter exercise your ability to manipulate operators. 
But Pblm. 5.2 shows you a path to the all-important momentum operator that is different 
from the one I used in § 5.2. And Pblm. 5.3, which you should at least read, reveals a 
subtle difficulty that can infect the process of generating operators using the prescription 
in § 5.3. Finally, the last several explore the momentum representation of operators. 

Exercises 

/SA Operators—and All That 

l , The operators Q\, Q 2 , and Q 3 are defined to act as follows upon a (well-behaved) function 

/(*):„ 

o Qi squares the first derivative of f(x)\ 
o Q 2 differentiates f(x) twice; 
o Qs multiplies f(x) by x 4 . 

[a] For each of these operators, write down an explicit expression for Qi f(x). 

[b] Simplify the operators expression Q 2 Q 3 - Q 3 Q 2 , writing your result in terms of the 
variable x. Do Q 2 and Q$ commute? 

[c] Derive an expression for 

Q 2 Q 3 - Qs Q 2 

in terms of the operators x and p. 

[d] An operator Q is linear if, for arbitrary well-behaved functions fi{x) and / 2 (x), the 
following property holds: 

Q [ci /i(x) +c 2 / 2 (x)] = ci Qfi(x) + c 2 Q/ 2 (x). 

Prove whether or not each of the three operators defined above is linear. 


Exercises and Problems 175 



Problems 

5.1 A “Derivation” of the Momentum Operator 

One way to deduce the form of the momentum operator p is to work from the necessary 
correspondence between expectation values and classical observables. Suppose, as in § 5.2, 
we seek an expression for the mean value of the momentum, (p). Reasoning by analogy with 
our expression for ( x ), we could use P(x,t) as a weighting factor and write 

/ oo rc © 

pP(x,t)dx = / p^*(x,t)' i if(x,t)dx. (5.1.1) 

•OO j —DO 

To use this result, we need to express p^*(x ) t)'it(x,t) as a function of x. Let’s begin 
with Eq. (5.86), which I’ll ask you to take on faith: 

W> = mj- t (x). (5.1.2) 


[a] Expand the first time derivative of (x) and use the time-dependent Schrodinger Equa¬ 
tion (3.39) to show that 


- (x) = — 
dt ' ' 2m 


[b] Next, show that 


X**(x, t) ^ #(x, t) - X®(x, t) (x, t) 


<*> = £ 


^(at, t) dx 


= /%*(*, 

J-OO 


t)p^(x t t) dx 


dx. (5.1.3) 

(5.1.4a) 

(5.1.46) 


where p = -ihdfdx. 

Hint: Perform two integrations by parts on the second term on the right-hand side of 
Eq. (5.1.3). 

[c] Repeat the derivation of the momentum operator starting from the expression (5.1.4a) 
for the expectation value. Use integration by parts and the Dirac delta function. 

5.2 A Correspondence Conundrum (Symmetrization) 

The expectation value (Q) of an observable Q can be measured in the laboratory—it is just 
the mean value obtained in an ensemble measurement of Q. This quantity, therefore, must be 
real. This fact of nature has interesting implications for the generation of quantum mechanical 
observables, as we shall now see. 

Suppose we need to evaluate the mean value of the product of position and momentum. 
The observable in question is xp, and, in classical physics, it makes no difference whether we 
represent this observable by x(t)p(t) or by p(i)x(£). In quantum physics we have a choice 
of two operators: xp or px, and it does make a difference. 

You can see why by writing down expressions for the mean value of xp for a state 
represented by a wave function $( x,t ) using these two operators. In the first instance, the 
mean value of xp is 


(xp) = f V*(x, t)x ^{x t t)dx t (5.2.1) 

J -oc 

but in the second, it’s 

(px) = f V*(x,t) 

J -oo 


x^(x t t) dx. 


(5.2.2) 


176 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 



L 


[a] Show that neither xp nor px is an acceptable operator representation of the observable xp, 
because both violate the requirement that the expectation value of a physically measurable 
quantity must be real. 

[b] Now try the operator 


C = i [:xp + px ]. 


(5.2.3) 


Is this an acceptable operator representation of the observable xp? Prove your answer. 
(Hint: Feel free to integrate by parts.) Why do we need the factor of 1/2 in this expres¬ 
sion? What, if anything, does your answer have to do with the Correspondence Principle? 
Remark: This problem illustrates a difficulty that occasionally crops up in determining oper¬ 
ators from classical functions of time. If two operators Q\ and Q 2 do not commute, i.e., if 
Q 1 Q 2 i 1 Q 2 Q 1 , then there is an ambiguity in the operator that represents Q\Qi\ should we 
use Q 1 Q 2 or Q 2 Q 1 ? The answer, as you saw in this problem, is neither. In Chap. 10 we’ll 
learn why both of these forms fail: all quantum mechanical operators must satisfy a property 
called Hermiticity. Neither Q 1 Q 2 nor Q 2 Q 1 satisfies this property, so neither can be used in 
quantum mechanics. However, the combination (5.2.3) is Hermitian and is the correct oper¬ 
ator representation of the observable xp. In quantum mechanics, the process of constructing 
an observable for a product of two non-commuting observables is called symmetrization. 

5.3 Probing the General Properties of Wave Packets 

In Chap. 4, we considered specific wave packets that could represent states of the free particle 
at t = 0. All of these functions have the same mathematical structure: 


#(*,0) = /Me"**"', 


where f(x) is a real , relatively smooth function of x. For convenience let’s suppose that 
\I>(x, 0) has been properly normalized and that f(x) is centered at x = 0 with width Ax. 
Examining the properties of this general form is useful, since a huge number of commonly- 
used wave packets can be described in this way—with appropriate choice of /(x), of course. 

[a] Evaluate the expectation value of p for this wave packet. 

Hint: The normalization requirement on the state function means that ^(x, 0)| —> 0 as 
x —> ± 00 . Consider integration by parts. 

[b] Now, consider a free-particle state function that is real at t = 0. What is (p) for a state 
represented by such a function? Is the mean value of the kinetic energy, (T), necessarily 
equal to zero for such a state? Is (x) necessarily equal to zero for such a state? If not, 
under what conditions on the real wave function 'I'(x, 0) is (x) = 0? 

[c] Consider the amplitude function A(k) for a general wave function that is real at t = 0. 
Under what condition on this wave function is A(k) a real function of kl Suppose this 
condition is met; what is (x) for a state that is represented by such a function? 

5.4 Practicing Operator Algebra 

In this chapter, we’ve formulated a prescription for determining the operator that represents an 
observable in quantum mechanics starting with the classical function of x and p that represents 
it in classical theory. We usually derive these operators in the position representation; but, as 
I noted in § 5.8, we can do so in the momentum representation. Although we won’t use the 
momentum representation extensively in this book, we shall work with it in this problem in 
ordehto obtain some practice with operator algebra. 

[a] \) \yrite down the operators in the position and momentum representations for each of the 

following observables of the specified one-dimensional systems: 

(1) the kinetic energy of a free particle; 

(2) the potential energy of a particle in a gravitational field V(x) = mgx\ 

(3) the potential energy of a particle with a simple harmonic oscillator potential energy. 

[b] In classical physics, the total energy E of a conservative system (i.e., one whose potential 
energy does not depend on time) is related to the Hamiltonian by 


Exercises and Problems 177 



H(x,p) - E = 0 [for a conservative system] 


This is just the classical expression of the law of conservation of energy. Consider a 
one-dimensional simple harmonic oscillator. Write down the operator equivalents of 
this equation in the position and momentum representation. Let your equations operate 
on ^(rM) or <3>(p) as appropriate. 

5.5 The Position Operator in the Momentum Representation 

Let ^(®,0) denote an arbitrary free-particle state function at t = 0. Starting from the 
expression (5.11) for the position expectation value, and using the Fourier transform relations 
of Chap. 4 to zip back and forth between the position and momentum representations, derive 
Eq. (5.90) for the position operator in the momentum representation. 

5.6 How to Choose a Representation 

NOTE: This problem uses results from Pblm. 4.6. 

In § 5.8, I noted that quantum mechanical operators can be written in a variety of different 
representations. For example, Eqs. (5.89) give the operators x and p in the position rep¬ 
resentation ; Eqs. (5.90) give these operators in the momentum representation. Position and 
momentum operators are the fundamental observables of physics, so once we know x and p 
in a given representation, we can work out the form of any observable in that representation. 

For example, the fonn of the kinetic energy operator T for a single particle in one 
dimension in the position representation is developed in Example 5.3 [see Eq. (5.49)]. In 
the momentum representation, the operator p instructs us to simply multiply its operand by 
p. Hence the kinetic energy operator in the momentum representation is simpler than in the 
position representation: 


f = 



2m 


2 m dx 2 
2 m 


position representation; 
momentum representation 


(5.6.1) 


Comparing these forms, you might guess that it’s easier to evaluate expressions that include 
T in the momentum representation, where this operator calls for a simple multiplication, than 
in the position representation, where it requires evaluating a second derivative. Let’s see if 
this is true. 

Suppose we want to evaluate the expectation value (T) fl (0) of the kinetic energy at 
t = 0 for the n th stationary state of the infinite square well of Example 5.1. We can use the 
momentum probability amplitude <f>„(p) from Problem (4.6) to determine this quantity in the 
momentum representation. 

[a] Write down expressions for ( T) n (0) in the position and momentum representations. In 
each case, write down an explicit integral , inserting the appropriate amplitude functions 
and carefully indicating the limits of integration, but do not evaluate the integrals. 

[b] Choose one of your expressions in part [a] and evaluate (T) n (0). (One of your expres¬ 
sions is much easier to evaluate than the other. Obviously, I want you to choose the 
easiest of the two expressions.) 

[c] Repeat parts [a] and [b] for the uncertainty in the kinetic energy , (AT%(0). 

5.7 Efficient Evaluation of Expectation Values 

We can evaluate the expectation value of position (x) in either the position representation [a 
la Eq. (3.40a)] or in the momentum representation [a la Eq. (5.91/?)]. Almost invariably, one 
representation is to be preferred over the other—if for no other reason than that the required 
algebra is easier in one representation. Therefore, it is useful to consider the conditions under 
/^which the position or momentum representation of this quantity is preferable. 

[a] Consider a Gaussian wave packet Eq. (4.54) centered on x = 0 (see § 4.5). Evaluate 
(®) ( t ) and (p) (i) for this wave packet in the position representation. 


178 Chap. 5 Observables in Quantum Physics 




Evaluate (x) ( t ) and (p) (Q for a Gaussian wave packet in the momentum representation 
(see Question 4-12). 

The wave function of a square wave packet is 




' 0 

\ p ipox/ti 

v/2 L 
, 0 


—oo < x < L \ 
-L<x<L\ 
L < x < oo. 


Write down explicit expressions for (x) and (p) in terms of this wave function (but 
n don’t evaluate the integrals yet). 

[d] Derive an expression for the momentum probability amplitude <£(p) for the square wave 
packet. Using your function, write down expressions for ( x ) and (p) in terms of the 
momentum probability amplitude. 

[e] Examine your expressions for (x) and (p) from parts [c] and [d]. Choose the easiest 
expression for each expectation value and evaluate the necessary integrals to determine 
the mean values of position and momentum for the square wave packet. 


Exercises and Problems 179 



CHAPTER 6 


A Quantum Equation Of Motion 

The Schrddinger Equation At Last 


6.1 What We Talk About When We Talk About Motion 

6.2 Satisfying Examples 

6.3 A Personality Profile of the TDSE 

6.4 Superposition Derived 

6.5 Is Probability Conserved? 

* 6.6 The Free-Particle Wave Packet Revisited 

* 6.7 The Life and Times of a Gaussian Wave Packet 

6.8 Probability Fluid and Its Flow 

6.9 Probability Flow in the Laboratory 

6.10 Final Thoughts: Quantum Causality 



My natural instinct teaches me 
(And instinct is important, O!) 
You’re everything you ought to be, 
and nothing that you oughtn’t O! 

—Melissa, 
in Princess Ida 
by Gilbert and Sullivan 


We all know intuitively what we mean by motion. Motion is change, evolution, develop¬ 
ment. A dove soars across a turquoise noon-day sky; a meteor plunges earthward from 
the night-black heavens; a train derails and falls off a bridge, plummeting to the jagged 
rocks below. The world is alive with motion. 

It is only a slight exaggeration to say that physics is the study of motion. Physicists 
spend much of their lives studying the evolution of physical systems : how the properties 
of these systems change with time. 

In classical physics, too, we know what we mean by motion. To study the motion 
of, say, a single macroscopic particle, we solve Newton’s Second Law for the particle’s 
orbit r(£) for all times after some initial time to. Once we know the orbit, we can 
calculate other physical properties of the particle. So, in principle at least, we can fully 
describe the evolution of a state of the particle provided we know the potential V^r, t) 
that describes the forces acting on it and the initial conditions r(£ 0 ) and v(£ 0 ) that 
specify the state. Of course, we must also be able to solve the equations of motion. This 
mathematical and numerical task is no picnic—and therein lies the principle difficulty of 
classical physics. 

An additional problem rears its head in the study of microscopic systems, for we 
must answer the subtle conceptual question, what does it mean to speak of the motion 
of a microscopic particle? This conundrum arises because of a feature of microscopic 
particles that we discussed in Chap. 5: such a particle does not have a position until 
we measure this observable. That is, the conceptual difficulty with motion in quantum 
mechanics derives from the latent character of the particle-like properties of microscopic 
particles. 

In quantum physics we describe observables and their evolution in the language of 
probabilities. We have already discovered (Chap. 3) that knowledge about the position 
of microscopic particles (in an ensemble) is represented by the probability density for 
their quantum state, P(x,t) = ^*(x, £)^(x,£), and by such statistical quantities as the 
expectation value {x). So it should come as no surprise that we talk about the motion 
of such particles in probabilistic terms. 

So the very nature of knowledge in quantum physics gives rise to an unusual, 
counter-intuitive notion of motion that is difficult to picture. So physicists call on pic¬ 
torial analogies based on their (macroscopic) experience. For example, one way to 
envision motion in the microworld is as the propagation—or flow —of a region of en¬ 
hanced position probability. This peculiar idea is illustrated in Fig. 6.1; we’ll explore it 
in detail later in this chapter. But beware : these analogies are seductive. They can lead 
you down a garden path to impure classical thoughts. So, as you contemplate Fig. 6.1, 
keep in mind the caveats of Chap. 3 concerning the meaning of the probability density. 
For example, each of the density functions shown in this figure has a finite spread (or 
width); but this does not imply that the corresponding particles are of finite size. The 
particles whose state these functions represent are, in our model, indivisible mass-points. 


181 



without dimension or internal structure. Rather, the finite spread in Fig. 6.1 means that 
the positions of these particles cannot be known precisely— i.e. t they’re not meaningfully 
defined in the absence of measurement. 


Pix. t 0 ) 


A 


p{x, f,) 


P(X, t 2 ) 


Time: t 0 


Time: f, 


Time: t 2 


Figure 6.1 Snapshots of a onc-dimensional wave packet at three limes. The propagation 
and spreading illustrated here will be explored in § 6.6 and 6.7. 


You also need to remember that neither the wave function nor the probability 
density exists in ordinary, geometrical space. A probability density P(x , t) is information 
incarnate : it speaks to the likelihood of obtaining one of a variety of possible results 
in a position measurement. As the particles in an ensemble move through space, their 
wave function $l{x,t) evolves with time; consequently P{x,t) changes, and so does the 
(probabilistic) position information it contains. Thus in quantum physics, the “motion of \ I 
a particle” is described by the evolution of the state function, which is interpreted at each 
time from the position probability density . 

We begin our exploration of quantum motion by familiarizing ourselves with the 
equation that describes the time development of state functions: the time-dependent 
Schrodinger equation (3.39) (§ 6.1 and 6.2). We’re going to spend most of the rest of 
this book tracking down solutions of this important equation, so we’ll take the time here 
to get to know it well. The “personality” of the Schrodinger equation is defined by its 
mathematical characteristics, which we’ll scrutinize in § 6.3-6.4. Then, in § 6.7, we’ll 
meet our paradigm of quantum motion: the propagation of a free-particle wave packet. 

A final note: Left to its own devices, a quantum state changes with time ac¬ 
cording to the Schrodinger equation. But a measurement also alters a quantum state, 
in an indeterminate way that is not described by this equation. We’ll learn how to 
treat measurement-induced changes of state in Chap. 13. But here we’ll consider only 
unobserved particles. No measurements allowed. 


182 


Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



6.1 WHAT WE TALK ABOUT WHEN WE TALK ABOUT MOTION 

i / 

/ In Newtonian mechanics, we study the evolution of the state descriptor of a particle—its 
trajectory—by solving the classical equation of motion, Newton’s Second Law (5.5). 
Similarly, to study the evolution of the quantum state descriptor—the state function—we 
need a “quantum equation of motion.” In 1926 the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrodinger 
(1887-1961) published such an equation. Schrodinger was an extraordinary scientist 
and gifted thinker who contributed to fields as diverse as psychology and biology. 
He also wrote lucidly on quantum physics for both technical and lay readers. 1 But 
Schrodinger’s greatest contribution was undoubtedly the equation that bears his name: 
the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation (TDSE), [Eq. (3.39)], 

~2mda?^ X '^ + v i x )^ x ^) = ( 6 . 1 ) 

This equation fully describes the evolution of the quantum states of a system—if, that 
is, no one sneaks into the lab and performs a measurement on it. 

Although the TDSE was not—indeed, cannot be— derived , neither did it spring 
from empty space into Schrodinger’s mind. 2 In the 1920’s, Schrodinger came to the 
study of the then nascent quantum theory via research in statistical mechanics and the 
physics of continuous media, work that inculcated in him a thorough understanding 
of the mathematics and physics of vibrations and waves. Stimulated by a 1925 paper 
by Einstein on the quantum theory of an ideal gas, Schrodinger erected his theory on 
the foundation of de Broglie’s matter waves (Chap. 2). Guided by geometrical and 
wave optics, Schrodinger generalized a fundamental equation of classical mechanics, the 
Hamilton equation, to formulate his wave theory of microscopic particles. 3 

The road we’ll follow to the TDSE is more direct than the one Schrodinger trav¬ 
elled. Our first step on this road is to find an operator to represent energy, which we’ll 
/do using a strategy we devised in Chap. 5. 

The Energy Operator 

In § 5.3 we sought an operator p that represents the observable momentum. Our game 
plan was to find an operator that, when applied to a pure momentum function with 
momentum p and energy E, 

'S/ P (x,t) = (6 .2) 

v27 th 

headers interested in pursuing some of Schrodinger’s best technical writings should seek out his Four 
Lectures on Wave Mechanics (London: Blackie and Sons, 1928). Noteworthy among his non-technical works 
are My View of the World (London: Cambridge University Press, 1964) and Science and Humanism (London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1951). A particularly good biography is William T. Scott’s Erwin Schroedinger 
(Amherst: University of Mass. Press, 1967). 

2 You can find a fascinating account of the genesis of the TDSE—and of Schrodinger’s other trail- 
blazing research in quantum theory—in Chap. 5 of The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics by 
Max Jammer (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966). But you’ll have to look for this book in a library rather than 
a bookstore; it has, inexcusably, been allowed to go out of print. 

Hamilton’s equation looks a bit like the TDSE. It is written in terms of a quantity called the action 
function that is usually denoted by W. The action function is the integral of T - V along a path of the 
system, and Hamilton’s equation has the form —d W/dt = T+ V . For more on the Hamiltonian formulation 
of classical mechanics, see Chap. 7 of Classical Dynamics of Particles and Systems by Jerry B. Marion (New 
York: Academic Press, 1970). 



Sec. 6.1 What We Talk About When We Talk About Motion 183 



would yield the value of the momentum, i.e., 


pty p (x,t) = pty p (x,t). (6.3) 

We then postulated (Postulate III) that this operator could be used to extract momentum 
information from all quantum states: 


p = -ml. (6.4) 

OX 

We now need an energy operator E that extracts information concerning the energy. 
So let’s find an operator that, when applied to a pure momentum function, yields the 
value of the energy, i.e., 


EV p (x,t) = EV p {x,t). (6.5 a) 

The appearance of this value in the exponential in (6.2), where it’s on a par with the 
momentum, suggests that, as in (6.4), we should differentiate. But in this exponential, 
E multiplies t. So we differentiate with respect to time, viz., 

= k E ' Vp(x ' ty {65h) 

From (6.5a) we can easily isolate the operator that satisfies (6.5a): 


isih m 


energy operator 


( 6 . 6 ) 


Question 6-1 

Use this operator to extract the value of the energy from the pure momentum function (5.15). 

Still following the approach of Chap. 5, we now hypothesize that we can identify 
this operator with the energy of an arbitrary quantum state. This supposition establishes 
the correspondence 

QUANTUM PHYSICS 


OBSERVABLE 


OPERATOR 

energy 


E 


The Energy Equation 


(6.7) 


Using the energy operator, we can translate classical equations containing the observable 
energy into their quantum-mechanical counterparts. The most fundamental of these 
equations is (§ 5.4) the equality of E and the classical Hamiltonian, 


E = H. 


( 6 . 8 ) 


184 


Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 





By definition H (for a single particle in one dimension) is 4 

(6.9) 

( 6 . 10 ) 

The quantum-mechanical counterpart of Eq. (6.8) is the operator equation 

E = H = T + V. (6.11) 


H(x,p) = T(p) + V(x,t) 


To obtain an explicit form of this equation for a particular system, we just replace the 
abstract operators in it with the appropriate instructions. For example, using Table 5.2 
and Eq. (6.6), we find that in the position representation the Hamiltonian operator (6.10) 
is 


h 2 d 2 

So the quantum-mechanical energy equation (6.11) is 

ih Tt = ~L& + nx ' t) - 


( 6 . 12 ) 


(6.13) 


This is the operator form of the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation. 

To get the form (6.1) of this equation, we just let its operators act on an arbitrary 
wave function viz.. 


- Q x 2 t) + v (s, t)^(x, t ) = ih^H{x,t) 


TDSE 


This omnipresent equation is often written in a shorthand form, such as 

r\ 

n^{x,t) = in—^{x t t) 


(6.14) 

// 

(6.15a) 


or, by people who really want to conserve pencils, as 

n^(x,t) = EM{x,t). // (6.15ft) 

I don’t care how you write the Schrodinger equation, but commit it to memory. 

The Fundamental Postulate of Quantum Dynamics 

Note carefully that I did not derive the TDSE. Like the operator identifications in it, 
this equation is one of our fundamental postulates. More precisely, the fourth postulate 
of quantum physics avers that the TDSE describes the evolution of any state of any 
quantum system: 


4 The potential energy V may depend on time—as it does, for example, for a particle in a time- 
dependent electromagnetic field. For most of this volume, however, we shall concentrate on systems with 
time-independent potentials—so-called conservative systems. (See Chap. 7.) 


Sec. 6.1 What We Talk About When We Talk About Motion 185 




The Fourth Postulate of Quantum Mechanics 
The time development of the state functions of an isolated quantum system is governed 
by the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation Wit = ih—ty, where H = T + V is the 
Hamiltonian of the system. 


Notice carefully the word isolated in this postulate—which serves to remind us 
that the TDSE describes the evolution of a state provided no observations are made. An 
observation (usually) alters the state of the observed system; and, versatile as it is, the 
TDSE cannot describe such changes. 5 

The role of the TDSE in problem solving is paramount: once we know the Hamilto¬ 
nian n of a system, we can use this equation to discover the space- and time-dependence 
of its state functions. In this chapter we’ll probe the time dependence of these functions; 
in Chap. 7, we’ll investigate their spatial dependence. 

Aside: On Wave Equations. Schrodinger initially referred to his theory by the 
slightly repellent name undulatory mechanics, which he later changed to wave me¬ 
chanics. So the TDSE is often called the wave equation of quantum mechanics. 

But I won’t use this colorful language, lest it mislead you into imagining that the 
state function is a wave in ordinary, geometrical space, like an electromagnetic wave. 
Strictly speaking, the TDSE does fall into the mathematical class of equations called 
wave equations. But it differs in form from the classical wave equations that we 
use to describe oscillations on a string, electromagnetic fields, and the like. For a 
three-dimensional wave r(r,t) with phase velocity v ph , the classical equation of 
propagation is 

v2r < r ’ j > = iS r(r ' () - 

Unlike the TDSE, this equation is second order in time. There are other classical wave 
equations, however, that are first-order in time, such as the classical heat equation; 
but unlike the TDSE, these equations do not require a complex solution. [For more 
on classical wave equations, see The Physics of Waves by W. C. Elmore and M. A. 

Heald (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969).] 

The TDSE in 3D 


V' 


Our immediate applications of Schrodinger’s theory will be to simple systems in one 
dimension, so we’ll use Eq. (6.14). But it’s easy to generalize this equation to a single 
particle in three dimensions or to a many-particle system. For the former system, the 
state function is #(r ,t) and the Hamiltonian operator is 


H = 


-f-V 2 + V(r ,f). 
2m 


[single particle in three dimensions] 


(6.16) 


In this operator, the Laplacian V 2 in rectangular coordinates is 

2 d 2 d 2 d 2 

dx 2 dy 2 dz 2 


(6.17) 


5 But not all measurements induce a change of state. For example, an energy measurement on an 
ensemble in a state with a well-defined energy won’t change the state of the members. This is, however, a very 
special case. The point to retain is that in general , a measurement induces an instantaneous, uncontrollable 
change of state. 


186 


Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 




(6.18) 


So the TDSE for a single particle in three dimensions is 

-^V 2 ^( r ,f) + 7( r ,f)^( r ,f) = ih-^^(r t t). 

The Hamiltonian of a many-particle system—say, an atom—contains kinetic and potential 
energy operators for each constituent particle and interaction potentials for all pairs of 
particles; we shall meet and subdue this monster in Volume II. 

Even in one dimension, the TDSE in all its glory may appear rather fearsome: 
all those ominous partial derivatives, and an i = >/—[ lurking, menacingly, on the 
right-hand side. But it’s just another partial differential equation. And mathematicians, 
numerical analysts, and theoretical physicists have spent decades devising schemes to 
solve such equations. The remaining chapters of this book are a guided tour through 
some,of their best work. 

Getting Started: Initial Conditions 

For any Hamiltonian Ti there exists an infinite number of mathematically valid solutions 
to the TDSE. This wealth of wave functions raises a question: how do we specify a 
particular solution—that special function which represents the state we’re interested 
in? Evidently, the TDSE alone is not sufficient to identify a particular state; additional 
information is called for. For a clue to the missing information, let’s look to the theory 
of differential equations. 6 

Peering at Eq. (6.14), we espy a second-order position derivative and a first-order 
time derivative. These derivatives prescribe the additional information needed to specify 
a particular solution: The second-order partial with respect to x requires the values of 
q/(£,£) at two positions x\ these (complex) numbers are called boundary conditions. 
The first-prder partial derivative with respect to t requires the wave function at a single 
time US 'which we usually choose as £ 0 = 0. This (complex) function is called the initial 
condition: 

{^(x^to): —oo < x < oo} initial condition (6.19) 

In this section we’ll discuss initial conditions, leaving boundary conditions for § 6.3. 

The idea of defining a state by feeding initial conditions to a differential equation 
is hardly new. In Newtonian mechanics, we solve a differential equation: Newton’s 
Second Law, which for a single particle in one dimension with potential energy V(x,t) 
is 

= -&(*.*)■ ( 6 - 20 ) 

This differential equation is second order in time, so specifying a particular solution 
requires two pieces of information: the position and velocity (or, equivalently, the mo¬ 
mentum) at time to. 7 

°To become a reasonably proficient quantum mechanic, you’ll need a modicum of information about 
differential equations. Several worthwhile texts on this subject are recommended in this chapter’s Selected 
Readings. You do not, however, need to understand the mathematical theory of partial differential equations; 
in the few instances where we must consider such equations. I’ll provide the necessary mathematics. 

7 For convenience, physicists often prefer to define the initial state of a classical system by the position 
at two successive times, x(to) and x(<t). Since the velocity is just the first derivative of position, knowing 
these two positions is equivalent to knowing .t(<o) and v(fo). provided the difference <i — to is small. 



Sec. 6.1 What We Talk About When We Talk About Motion 187 



So classical and quantum physics are alike in that both require the state descriptor 
at a single time. The difference between these theories is the kind of information they 
require: in classical physics, the real numbers of the trajectory {x(t 0 ),p(t 0 )} at to\ in 
quantum physics, the complex state function ty(x,to) at to. In practice, we usually figure 
out the initial conditions from the physical circumstances of the system at t 0 — e.g ., from 
the way an experiment is initially set up. We’ll see a very simple example of this in 
Example 6.6. 

I’ve illustrated these differences schematically in Fig. 6.2 and summarized them 
below: 


CLASSICAL PHYSICS 


{a-(fo),p(fo)} 


Newton’s Second Law 


trajectory at t > to 


QUANTUM PHYSICS 


to): — oo < x < 00 } 


TDSE 


state function at t > to 



(a) 



Figure 6.2 Initial conditions in (a) 
classical and (b) quantum physics. In (a) 
a macroscopic particle moves through a 
two-dimensional space along the trajectory 
shown. In (b) a microscopic particle in one 
dimension is represented by a (complex) 
state function ^(ccjto), the real part of 
which is sketched. 


The physical implications of these differences are profound indeed. For example, 
uncertainty is implicit in the evolution of a quantum state, for its initial condition is 
a function characterized by a non-zero position uncertainty, Ax(fo) > 0. And this 
uncertainty A x(t) increases as the state evolves (§ 6.7). No such indeterminacy plagues 
the classical description of motion. 

In § 6.3, we’ll examine other consequences of the mathematical form of the TDSE. 
But first: some examples. 


188 


Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 






6.2 SATISFYING EXAMPLES 

/ 

/ 

/ 

And we are right, I think you’ll say, 
To argue in this kind of way 
And I am right. 

And you are right, 

And all is right—too-looral-lay!. 

—from The Mikado 
by Gilbert and Sullivan 



In Chaps. 3-5,1 showed you several alleged state functions. But each of these functions 
is a valid state descriptor only if it satisfies the TDSE of its system. In this section, I 
want to tie up a couple of loose ends by demonstrating that two of the wave functions 
we’ve used most often, the free particle wave packet and the ground-state wave function 

of the infinite square well, are in fact legitimate. 

S' 

Example 6.1. The Ground State Wave Function of the Particle in a Box 

In two examples in Chap. 5 we calculated properties of the ground state of a particle of 
mass m whose potential was infinite everywhere except in a region of length L centered 
on x = 0. This system is the particle in a box. In Example 5.1, we evaluated (p) and, in 
Example 5.5, A p for this state at t = 0. 

In these examples I used (without proof) the wave function 


#i(z,0) 



<x<\l 
2 “ “ 2 . 


( 6 . 21 ) 


(The label to the right of this function reminds us that it’s zero everywhere except in the 
box—a condition that arises from the infinite potential at the walls (§ 7.4).] This function is 
the t = 0 counterpart of the ground-state wave function, which we’ll derive in Chap. 7. The 
time-dependence we’ll discover there is a simple exponential involving t and the constant 


Ei = 


ir 2 h 2 
2mL 2 


( 6 . 22 ) 


This time-dependent wave function is 






--L < x < -L 

\ L) 

2 ~ “ 2 


(6.23) 


The constant E\ is the (well-defined) energy of this state. 

To check that the function (6.23) satisfies the TDSE for this system, we need worry 
only about the region inside the box, for the state function is zero elsewhere. In this region 
V = 0, so H = f, and the TDSE (6.14) is 


= *£*(*.«) 


[-\l<x<\l). (6.24) 


Now we just insert ^i(a;, t) into each side of (6.24). The left-hand side of this equa¬ 
tion contains the second derivative of \&i(a:,<), which we calculate from the first derivative 


= VI K) sin ('!)*"' 


-iBit/h 


(6.25) 


Sec. 6.2 Satisfying Examples 189 



as 


£*•<*■*> = £ [£**M 

(6.26a) 

-jl H) ffi-H) 

(6.26 b) 

7T 2 

= OM)- 

(6.26c) 

So the left-hand side of (6.24) is 



(6.27) 


[Do you see a familiar factor on the right-hand side of Eq. (6.27)? If not, glance at Eq. (6.22), 
then look again.] 

Evaluating the right-hand side is even easier: we just differentiate ^i(x,f) once with 
respect to time: 8 


i(M) = M)- (6.28) 

So the right-hand side of Eq. (6.24) is 

n 212 

= E^ x {x y t) = (x,t). (6.29) 

This expression is equal to HVi{x,t) in Eq. (6.27). The ground state function (6.23) does 
indeed solve the TDSE for the system. Postulate IV is satisfied. 

!/ Return of the Free Particle 


In addition to the infinite square well, we’ve exhaustively examined the free particle of 
Chap. 4. The TDSE of this system is simply 

~2mdo?^( X '^ = [for a free particle] (6.30) 

In § 4.1, I argued that a reasonable state function for a free particle in one dimension is 
a wave packet —a superposition of an infinite number of pure momentum functions that 
looks like 


/ oo 

^{p)^ p (x,t)dp. 

-oo 


Although this packet is spatially localized (and hence normalizable), it cannot represent 
a quantum state of a free particle unless it satisfies the TDSE (6.30). I want to take you 
through this verification in two stages: first I’ll show you that the pure momentum state 
functions that make up the packet satisfy this equation (Example 6.2). Then we’ll turn 
to the packet itself (Example 6.3). 


You can see now why I used the full x- and f-dependent form of the proposed function in the TDSE. 
Had we tried to validate this function at a particular time, say, at t = 0, we’d have been unable to work out 
the time derivative in this equation. 


190 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 




Example 6.2. The Pure Momentum Function 

As presented in Chap. 4, the pure momentum function has the form 


^p(*i f) 



e i(px-Et)/h 


To make clear the derivation to follow, I want to write this function in terms of k. To this 
end. I’ll use the free-particle dispersion relation to relate E to k: 

v 2 fi2 fc 2 

E — -— = ——. [for a free particle] (6.31) 

2m 2m 

Inserting this relation into the general form of the pure momentum function gives a function 
that pertains only to the free particle, 

f/( 2 m» [for a free particle] (6.32) 

V27r/i 


The derivatives we need when we insert this function into the TDSE are 9 

& e i[kx-hk*t/(2m)) = 

OX 2 

= _ k ^ e i[kx-hk 2 t/(2m)] 


(6.33 a) 
(6.33 b) 


and 


i[kx-hk 2 t/(2m)\ _ ihk 2 Hkx-hk 2 t/(2m)] 

dt "2m 


(6.33c) 


Now, the left-hand side of the TDSE is -h 2 /(2m) times (6.33/?), 

W P (M) = ( 6 - 34 ) 

The right-hand side is +ih times (6.33c), which is equal to (6.34). This equality verifies 
the TDSE for the pure momentum function! Again, Postulate IV is happy. 


In Example 6.2, we’ve proven only that the pure momentum function for a free 
particle satisfies the appropriate TDSE. Yet, as we know, this function is not a valid state 
function, for it fails to satisfy the conditions of § 3.5. This example reminds us that 


Rule 

To represent a quantum state, a function must satisfy the TDSE of the system and be 
normalizable, single-valued, continuous, and smoothly-varying. 


9 The general rules for differentiating exponents I’m using are handy problem-solving tools. Here are 
their general forms: 


JH_ e i(kx-ujt) 

dx 11 

£_ e i(fcx-wt) 

at" 


= (—tw) n e i <* x - wt > 


Sec. 6.2 Satisfying Examples 191 




Example 6.3. The Gaussian Free-Particle State Function 
Now let’s tackle the wave packet 

tffoi) = -y= / dk. (6.35) 

V2tt J_ qo 

To simplify the proof that this function satisfies the TDSE (6.156), let’s write this equa¬ 
tion more compactly, as (7f - E)ty(x y t) = 0. For the wave packet (6.35), the operator 
(H - E)^(x, t) is 




_l r 

\/27r y_ c 


~ ih Tt 


/»oo 

i4(fc)e‘ I ‘* _ * t>/(am) ‘ l dk 


— r 

j-. 


(6.36) 


To prove that the right-hand side is zero, we must first get rid of the unsightly partial 
derivatives parading through it. The amplitude function A(k) is independent of x and t, so 
we can treat it as a constant when we evaluate d 2 fdx 2 and d/dt. Let’s interchange the 
order of integration and differentiation in both terms in (6.36) and slide these derivatives 
through the integrals: 10 


(H - E)*{x 




m 


9 2 i[kx-hk 2 /(2m)t\ 


dx 2 


dk 


-ih f A(k) f^-e ilfcl - ftfc2/(2m)t] 
7-00 [9t 


(6.37) 


dk. 


[I have also done a little housecleaning in (6.37), eliminating factors of l/v/^r from each 
term.] 

But we’ve already evaluated the derivatives in Eq. (6.37) in Example 6.2. Using 
Eqs. (6.33) we find 

e «[fe®—ftfc 2 /(2m)i] dk (6 3g) 


(H ~ £)#(; 


M) = £ 


A(k) 


( ikk2 

2m V 2m 


Now, the expression in square brackets in (6.38) is zero—which proves that the wave 
packet (6.35) satisfies the TDSE of a free particle. This wave packet also is normalizable, 
continuous, and smoothly-varying, so it can represent a state of this system. Notice that 
this verification applies to any free-particle wave packet, because nowhere did we specify 
a particular amplitude function. 


In practice, we never need explicitly verify that a superposition such as the free- 
particle wave packet satisfies the TDSE of a system. Once we know that the constituents 
of the superposition satisfy this equation, we can conclude that their linear combination 
does. This vital property—the Principle of Superposition we first saw in Chap. 3— 
follows from the mathematical characteristics of the Schrodinger equation, which we’re 
going to investigate right now. 


10 What lets us do this is a theorem (from freshman calculus) called Leibniz’s Rule. According to this 
rule, we can legitimately interchange the order of integration and differentiation in terms like those appearing 
in Eq. (6.35) provided two conditions are met: (1) the integrand must be sectionatly continuous, i.e., it must 
have at most a finite number of point discontinuities; and (2) the integral must converge uniformly before and 
after the differentiation. 


192 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 




6.3 A PERSONALITY PROFILE OF THE TDSE 

Just as our friends have identifiable personality traits—grumpy, chummy, psychotic, 
etc.—so do equations have distinctive characteristics. One of the best ways to become 
familiar with a new equation is to identify its “mathematical personality.” In this section, 
we’ll “matho-analyze” the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation (TDSE). 

A physicist is interested in the TDSE as the equation that determines the space and 
time dependence of state functions. But a mathematician, looking at this equation, sees 
a linear, homogeneous partial differential equation of second order} 1 

Each of these mathematical attributes of the TDSE has important physical con¬ 
sequences. For instance, in § 6.1, I noted that the (mathematical) fact that the TDSE 
contains a first-order time derivative requires us to feed it (physical) information con¬ 
cerning the quantum state at the initial time: 


MATHEMATICS 


PHYSICS 

first-order time derivative 


initial conditions 


In this section we’ll discover several more examples of the beautiful interrelationship 
between mathematics and physics that permeates quantum mechanics. 

Question 6-2 

We’ve already noted another attribute of the TDSE: the presence of an i = y/^1 implies 
that its solutions must, in general, be complex. Prove that no real function of x and t can 
solve the TDSE. [Hint: What differential equation does satisfy?] 

On Boundary Conditions 


In § 6.1, I remarked that in order to specify a particular solution of the TDSE, we must 
provide the values of the state function at two locations; these values are boundary 
conditions. [Alternatively, we could provide the value of \I/(x,£) and its first derivative 
ft^x, t)/dx at one location.] For example, the following conditions must apply at all 
times to most wave functions for a single particle in one dimension that is confined (by 
the potential of the system) to a finite region of space: 


(E^x, t) —* 0 as x —* — oo 

(E^x, t) — » 0 as x —* +oo. 


[at all times t] 


(6.39) 


These conditions are familiar from Chap. 3 as statements that the wave function must be 
spatially localized [see Eq. (3.29)]. But Eqs. (6.39) may not correspond to your notion 
of boundary conditions, for they prescribe the values of ^(x, t) not at two (finite) points 
in space, but rather in two limits', x —» — oo and x —► +oo. 

Only in special model problems are boundary conditions for a one-dimensional 
system specified at finite points. A familiar and important example is the particle-in-a- 
box of Example 6.1. For the states of this system, the boundary conditions are the values 
of \I/(x,£) at the “walls”: 


tt(x = -\L } t) = 0 (6.40a) 

tf(x = +|L,t) = 0. (6.40ft) 


“Recall that a differential equation is said to be of n-th order if the highest derivative it contains is of 
order n. Thus, although the TDSE contains a first-order time derivative, it is a second-order equation, because 
its highest order derivative is d 2 /dx 2 . 


Sec. 6.3 A Personality Profile of the TDSE 193 




These boundary conditions are a consequence of the physical environment of the particle. 
The “walls” of the box are impenetrable, because the potential energy outside is infinite. 
[This model is the limit of the potential of a physical system in which a particle experi¬ 
ences extremely strong impulsive forces at these two points (see § 8.1 and Pblm. 8.11).] 
So the particle cannot “escape,” and the probability that we will detect it at x < —L /2 
or at re > +L/2 in a position measurement is zero. Mathematically, this means the 
probability density P(x, t) is zero outside the box, and so is the wave function. The 
requirement that this function be continuous everywhere (§ 3.5) leads us to the boundary 
conditions (6.40). 12 

Aside: Boundary Conditions in Three Dimensions. How we specify boundary 
conditions for three-dimensional quantum systems depends on the coordinate system 
we choose to work in. For instance, a widely-used three-dimensional model potential 
is a “spherical box” of radius a: 


V{r) = 



r < a\ 
r > a 


This potential is spherically symmetric, that is, it’s independent of the angles 9 and 
<p. So the chore of determining the state functions of a particle with this potential 
will be simplified if we choose to work in a coordinate system that conforms to this 
symmetry property: the spherical coordinates (r, 9, tp). 

In spherical coordinates (see Volume II), the kinetic energy operator T contains 
second-order partial derivatives with respect to r, 9, and < p. To specify a particular 
state function, therefore, we must provide six boundary conditions—two for each 
variable. The boundary conditions on r , for example, are specified as follows: 


4>(r = 0, 9, ip) = constant; 


(6.41a) 


y{r,9 } <p) -> 0 

r—* oc 


(6.41/;) 


(In Part V, we’ll delve into the boundary conditions for the variables 9 and </?.) Notice 
that in (6.41) we state one boundary condition at a point , r = 0, and the other in a 
limit, r —» oo. 


Linearity and Homogeneity: A Mathematical Side-Trip 


Our quantum equation of motion, the TDSE, is a special type of second-order partial 
differential equation: it is linear and homogeneous. I want to show you the physical con¬ 
sequences of these properties, but first we should review their definitions. For simplicity. 
I’ll begin with an ordinary differential equation. 

The general form of an ordinary differential equation of order n in the variable 


x is 


d n d n ~ l 

a °( x) d^ f w +ai Wd^=> f(x) 


jn- 2 


(6.42) 


+ a 2(x)j^Z2fM + --- + an Wf( x ) = g(x). 


12 You may be concerned by the fact that the first derivative of '!'( a; , f) is not continuous at the walls— 
i.e., the state functions of the infinite square well are not smoothly varying at x = ±L/2. Not to worry: this 
property is an artifice of the infinite potential in this model. The function d'ft(x,t)fdx is discontinuous at the 
walls because there is a discontinuous change in the potential energy at these points. Actual potentials may 
change sharply and drastically, but they invariably do so continuously. 


194 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



The prefactors a,(z) may be constants or functions and can be real or complex. If the 
function g(x) on the right-hand side is zero, then this equation is said to be homogeneous. 
But if g(x) / 0, the equation is said to be inhomogeneous. 13 

Notice that a linear equation cannot contain terms involving powers of f(x) or of 
its derivatives,, terms such as 


f 3 (x) 



3 


destroy the linearity of a differential equation. Similarly, a linear equation must not 
contain terms involving products of f(x) and one or more of its derivatives :; terms such 
as 


f(x) Tj {x) 


or 


I'M 




are also forbidden. If any such terms befoul the purity of a differential equation, then that 
equation is non-linear—and is to be avoided if possible. Here are a couple of examples: 


— f(x) 4- sins = 0 
ax 


(6.43) 


is a linear equation. But 




i2 


+ h(x) sin a; = 0 


(6.44) 


is not. 


“I don’t care about ordinary differential equations,” you mutter. “The TDSE is a 
partial differential equation. Tell me about partial differential equationsV' 

Okay. The general form of a partial differential equation of arbitrary order in 
several variables is a mess—lots and lots of terms. So I’ll show you the general form for 
a second-order, linear, partial differential equation in two independent variables. 
Since we’re interested in the TDSE, I’ll use x and t as the independent variables: 


d 2 d d d 2 

a o(z, <)t^/(z, t) + a, (x, *) + *)^/(s, t) + a 3 (z, t)-^f{x, t) 

d 2 

+ a ^ x '^dxdi^ x '^ + a 5 (‘'M)/(a,f) = g(xyt). 


(6.45) 


The multiplicative factors a, (re, t )—one or more of which may be constant or zero—are, 
in general, complex functions of the independent variables x and t. If g(x,t) = 0, 
Eq. (6.45) is homogeneous; otherwise it is inhomogeneous. The kind of terms that can 
populate a linear partial differential equation are limited. Absolutely forbidden are terms 
containing powers of derivatives of f{x,t) or products of factors involving f(x,t ) and 
its derivatives: e.g.. 




dx f{x,t) 


1 2 


r\ 

° r 


‘^Mathematicians have a slightly different—but equivalent—definition of a homogeneous differential 
equation: Suppose a function f(x) satisfies a linear differential equation such as (6.42). If cf(x) satisfies the 
same equation, where e is an arbitrary complex constant, then the equation is said to be homogeneous. Take 
a moment to convince yourself that this definition is equivalent to the one given in the text. 


Sec. 6.3 A Personality Profile of the TDSE 195 



It is easy to see that the TDSE (6.14) for a single particle in one dimension conforms 
to the form (6.45). If we gather all its terms on the left-hand side, we get 

^2 q2 q 

+ = 0, (6.46) 

which form makes it easy to read off the prefactors a,(3,i) for the TDSE: 

a a (x,t) = 
ai(x,t) = 0 
02 ( 2 , t) = —ih 

03 ( 3 , 0=0 (6.47) 

04(3,0 = 0 
05 ( 3,0 = V(x,t) 


A Little About Linear Differential Operators 


Because of the rather ungainly complexity of the general form (6.45), mathematicians 
often use a shorthand notation for its operators. I’ll use D(x , t) to denote a general linear, 
second-order differential operator in 3 and t. li The general form of a linear operator is 


D(x t t) = oo(3,0^2 +ai(®.0^ + a 2 (3,f)J^ 


d ^ 

+ 03 ( 3 , 0^2 + a ^ x ^dxdt + 05 ( 3 , 0 - 


(6.48) 


This notation enables us to write the general second-order linear differential equation 
(6.45) as 


D(x,t)f{x ) t) = g(x t t) 


(6.49) 


and the TDSE as 


D(x t t)*(x t t) = 0. (6.50) 

For the latter, the differential operator D(x , t ) is 

D(x,t) = H-E (6.51a) 

= T + V-E (6.51 b) 

= -^& +v ^- ih w (6 - 51c) 

Note carefully that (6.50) is a homogeneous differential equation. 


14 The operator D(x, t) belongs to a general class of mathematical critters called linear operators. Such 
operators play a very important role in quantum theory (see Chap. 10). By definition, an operator A is linear 
if for any two functions /1 and / 2 , 

A [ci/i(.x) + 02 / 2 ( 0 ;)] = ci Afi(x) + c 2 ^/ 2 (x). 

By the way, please don’t misconstrue my notational whimsy. The argument (s, t) I’ve appended to the general 
linear operator is there just to remind us what the independent variables are. The notation D(x y t) does not 
imply that D acts on x and/or on t. 


196 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 




Aside: The TDSE in Three Dimensions. The TDSE (6.18) for a single particle 
in three dimensions is a linear, homogeneous differential equation in four variables. 
For this case, the linear operator corresponding to (6.51) is 

D(r, t) = + V'(r^) - [three-dimensions] (6.52) 

Similarly, we can generalize the operator (6.52) to several particles in three dimensions 
(Volume II). 


Justifying the Normalization of State Functions 


To start our investigation of the properties of a linear homogeneous differential equation 
such as the TDSE (6.51), we’ll consider a feature that is related to the normalization 
procedure we developed in § 3.5. Suppose a function f(x,t) solves D(x y t)f(x,t) = 0. 
Then, for any complex constant c, the function cf(x,t) also solves this equation; i.e. t 


D(x,t)f(x) = 0 


D(x,t)[cf(x,t)] = 0 


(6.53) 


(Do you see why? Here’s a hint: What happens to the constant c when it is acted upon 
by a linear differential operator?) 

This simple fact justifies our procedure for nonnalizing state functions. Remember 
how we do this: If the function ^'{x } t) satisfies the TDSE but has a normalization 
integral equal to a finite number M / 1, then we construct the corresponding normalized 
function by multiplying t) by a complex constant: 


The constant <5 in the global phase factor e iS is an arbitrary real number, 
function satisfies the normalization condition 


/ ^*{x, t)'f?(x,t)dx = 1, 


(6.54) 
The new 


(6.55) 


and therefore can be meaningfully interpreted as a position probability amplitude. The 
property (6.53) assures us that if ^'(x,t) satisfies the TDSE, so does its normalized 
counterpart 

The second mathematical property we’re going to explore leads to a physical prin¬ 
ciple so important that it gets its own section. 


6.4 SUPERPOSITION DERIVED 


Like (6.53), which we used to justify normalization, our second property follows 
from the linearity and homogeneity of the TDSE. Suppose fi(x,t) and f 2 {x,t) solve 
D(x } t)f(x,t) = 0. Because this equation is homogeneous, the sum of these functions 
is also a solution; i.e.. 


D(x,t)h{x,t) = Ol 
D(x } t)f 2 (x i t) = 0 J 


D(x,t)[fi(x,t) + / 2 (M)] = 0. 


(6.56) 


Sec. 6.4 Superposition Derived 


197 





Taken together, properties (6.53) and (6.56) reveal that 


Rule 

Any linear combination of solutions of a linear, homogeneous differential equation is another 
solution of that equation. 


So if f\(x,t) and / 2 (a*,£) solve D(x } t)f(x,t) = 0 and if ci and c 2 are arbitrary complex 
constants, then cifi(x,t) + c 2 / 2 (a,f) also solves this equation: 


D(x t t)fi(x,t) = Ol 
D(x,t)f 2 {x,t) = 0 J 


D{x,t) [ci/i(x,«) + c 2 f 2 (x t t)] = 0. 


(6.57) 


This property can be extended to an arbitary linear combination of solutions; when 
applied to the TDSE, it leads to the Principle of Superposition. 

Let 'Pi and \J> 2 represent quantum states of a system with Hamiltonian 7Y, 15 


(H-E )\= 0 
(H - E)V 2 = 0 ‘ 


From the linearity and homogeneity of the TDSE we conclude [see Eq. (6.57)] that for 
arbitrary constants c\ and c 2 . 


(H - E)[c i®! + c 2 tf 2 ] = 0. (6.59) 

Therefore—and most importantly—the linear combination 

$ = Ci\Pi + c 2 'I' 2 [a superposition state] (6.60) 


represents a quantum state that is different from the ones represented by and ^ 2 . This 
is a mathematical way of stating the Principle of Superposition. Our little demonstration 
shows that this cornerstone of quantum physics is a manifestation of the mathematical 
character of the TDSE. 10 

Example 6.4. A Superposition State of the Particle in a Box 

To see a superposition state of a particular system, let’s return to our simple paradigm, 
the particle in a box. At t = 0, the wave function of the ground state of this system is 
[Eq. (6.21)] 


*.(*,0) = \Jl COS (tt|) [-\l<x< it] 


(6.6 la) 


1 J In this section, I have omitted the position and time dependence from the wave function to emphasize 
that these results pertain to any quantum system. 

10 The superposition state (6.60) is physically realizable (i.e., it represents a slate that could exist in the 
laboratory) only if 'I'(.r, t) is continuous, smoothly-varying, single-valued, and normalizable. Its normalizability 
follows automatically if the composite functions and ^2 are themselves normalizable. But they need not 
be; we saw in § 4.2 (on wave packets) that we can form a normalizable superposition of an infinite number of 
non-normalizable func t ions. 


198 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 





The well-defined energy of this state (A E — 0) is 


A 2 

2 mL 2 ' 


( 6.61 /;) 


The stationary state nearest in energy to the ground state is called the first excited state. 
At t = 0 the wave function of this state is 


**(*•“> = /l sin ( 2 *z) ■ 




and its well-defined energy is 


Ei = 4- 


(6.62a) 


(6.62/;) 



Question 6-3 

Verify that $ 2 ( 2 ,t) satisfies the TDSE for the particle in a box. [You will have to 
generalize the function in (6.62a) to times t > 0, just as we did for the ground state 
in Example 6.1.] 


Now, according to the Principle of Superposition, any linear combination of f) 
and ^ 2 (x,t) represents a third physically realizable state of this system. Suppose we mix 
2 parts t) to 7 parts ^OM) to brew the normalized state function 

= y^ 2^i(a;,t) (6.63) 

This function, which is graphed at t = 0 along with its constituents in Fig. 6.3, represents 
a physically realizable state of the particle in an infinite square well. You can see how it 
differs from the ground and first-excited states by examining the position information in the 
probability amplitudes. 




(b) 


Figure 6.3 A superposition state of a particle in a one-dimensional infinite square well, 
(a) The ground and first-excited states [Eqs. (6.61a) and (6.62a)]. (b) The superposition state 
of Eq. (6.63). 


Sec. 6.4 Superposition Derived 199 





✓ Question 6-4 

Verify my claim that Eq. (6.63) is normalized. [You can use the fact that # 1 ( 3 , 0) and 
4 > 2 (£, 0 ) are individually normalized. Oh yes ... Watch those limits of integration!] 

The superposition state (6.63) differs from its constituents in another important way: 
its energy is not sharp. Were we to calculate the energy uncertainty AI?(Q from (6.63), 
we would obtain A E > 0. I’ll spare you the algebraic contortions of this evaluation; in 
Chap. 12, I’ll show you an easy way to calculate such uncertainties. 

In Example 6.4 we constructed a non-stationary state from two stationary states. 
But, as I noted in § 3.2, we can extend the Principle of Superposition to more than 
two stationary states. Or we can combine two or more non-stationary states to form 
yet another non-stationary state. But all of the functions we combine to form such a 
superposition must solve the same Schrddinger equation. 


6.5 IS PROBABILITY CONSERVED? 


The TDSE has many uses. Foremost is its role in the determination of state functions. 
But we can also use this fundamental equation to address physical questions about the 
microworld. To illustrate (and to develop a result we’ll need in § 6.8), I want to consider 
the question of particle conservation: is the total number of particles conserved, or can 
particles be created and destroyed? 17 

In the language of probabilities, this question becomes a query about the position 
probability density: is the probability of finding a particle anywhere in space independent 
of time? We express this question mathematically in terms of the integrated probability 
P([— oo, oo], t ) of § 3.4. This quantity is the sum of the infinitesimal position probabilities 
P(x,t)dx for all values of x, i.e., [Eq. (3.26)] 

/ OO rOC 

P(x,t)dx = / '&*(x } t)'ff(x } t) dx. (6.64) 

-oo J —oc 

If microscopic particles are neither created nor destroyed, then this quantity must 
be independent of time—which is precisely the result I want to prove: 


Proclamation 6.1 

The probability of finding a microscopic particle anywhere in space does not change with 
time— i.e., (non-relativistic) particles are neither created nor destroyed. 


17 Since the TDSE applies only to non-relativistic systems, our answer will pertain only to particles 
whose velocities are much less than the speed of light. Particle creation and destruction does occur at relativistic 
energies. If, for example, an electron and a positron (a particle with the same mass as an electron but with 
the opposite charge) collide, they can mutually annihilate, creating photons. The reverse process, in which 
photons create an electron-positron pair, also occurs. For a readable, non-technical introduction to these 
seemingly magical events, see pp. 210-267 of Gary Zukav’s The Dancing Wit Li Masters: An Overview 
of the New Physics (New York: William Morrow, 1979). For a technical introduction, see § 4.6 of David 
Bohm’s textbook Quantum Theory (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1951) or, at a more advanced level, 
Relativistic Quantum Mechanics by J. D. Bjorken and S. D. Drell (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964). 


200 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 





Here is the mathematical expression of this proclamation: 


conservation of 
position probability 


Novice quantum mechanics sometimes fall into the subtle trap of arguing that this 
result follows from the fact (c.f., § 3.5) that the probability of finding a microscopic 
particle somewhere in space at a fixed time, say, t 0 , is constant [Eq. (3.29)] 

P ([- 00 , 00 ] ,t 0 ) = 1. (6.66) 

But Eq. (6.66) does not imply Eq. (6.65). To prove conservation of probability, we must 
look to the Schrodinger equation. 

Question 6-5 

Explain why we cannot conclude from (6.66) that (6.65) is true. [Hint: If ^(a’,i 0 ) is 
normalized at time £o, can we conclude that it is normalized at any other time ti ^ £ 0 ? If 
not, why not?] 



Argument: We’re going to prove Proclamation 6.1 for an arbitrary state of an arbitrary 
system. The proof uses only two facts: 

[1] the wave function ^(x,t) satisfies the TDSE 

t) = z/i—\P(:c, £); (6.61a) 

[2] the wave function is spatially localized — i.e., it satisfies the boundary con¬ 
ditions [Eq. (6.39)] 


*(*,*) 


x —*±oo 


0. [at any time t] 


(6.61b) 


To prove that the time derivative of the integrated probability (6.64) is zero, we 
first move the derivative inside the integral, where it must become a partial derivative, 


viz.. 


18 


^P([-oo,oo],£) = ^J ^*(x t t)^/(x t t)dx 

-L 


d 


-no 


( 6 . 68 ) 


— [tf*(a, *)*(&,*)] dx. 


dx. (6.69) 


To further simplify this integral, we use the chain rule, obtaining 

^P( [-00,00],*) = J ^f*(x,t)-^^(x i t) + ^f(x } t)-^^*(x,t) 

Next we must eliminate the partial derivatives in (6.69). At this point we avail 
ourselves of the TDSE (6.61a) to express these derivatives in terms of the system Hamil¬ 
tonian, e.g ., 




(6.70) 


^Interchanging the order of differentiation and integration in (6.68) can be rigorously justified, because 
the limits of the integration (with respect to s) do not depend on the variable of the partial derivative, t. 
(Remember that in quantum mechanics x and t are independent variables.) 


Sec. 6.5 Is Probability Conserved? 201 




The partial derivative of t) is easily obtained from (6.70), because for any operator 

Q, 


q/m]‘ = <?*/»• 


(6.71) 


Applying (6.71) to (6.70), we get 

And substituting Eqs. (6.70) and (6.72) into (6.69), we find 

j t P(l- oo.ool.f) = J°° {-^r(x,f)w(x,t) + ^(x,f) [w(m)]* 

= J °° {**(m)w*(M) - *0M) [w(m)]*} 


(6.72) 


| dx 

(6.73 a) 

dx. 

(6.73/7) 


Now, the Hamiltonian is H = T + V, so we can write Eq. (6.73/>) as the sum of two 
integrals, one each for T and for V: 


— P((-oo,oo],i) = - 



(P*(i,«)V r 4'(x 1 t) - <f(x,t) [^(x.t)]"} 


dx 

dx. 


(6.74) 


But the potential energy V(x,t) is real, so ^(.t, t) [V”(!/(£,£)]* = ^*(a,’,f)V r ^(a:,f), and 
the second integral in (6.74) is zero. We’re left with 

^P([-oo,oo],t) = -i J X {<H’(x,t)T<Hx,t) - <i(x,t) [r^z.t)]*} dx. (6.75) 


Look carefully at the two terms in (6.75): do they obviously cancel? That is, can we 
use the argument that eliminated the potential-energy integral from (6.73) to conclude 
that ^*(a;,i)T^(a:,/) is equal to ^(x,/)[T^(.'c,f)]*? 

Absolutely not! The kinetic energy operator T is a differential operator, 


2 m dx 2 ’ 


(6.76) 


so it can alter the mathematical form of the function it operates on. The tenns in (6.75) 
do cancel, but to prove this point we must take account of boundary conditions. And we 
must be crafty. 

We start this last step in our demonstration by inserting the explicit form of T from 
(6.76) into (6.75): 


^([- 00 , 00 ],*) = ^ 


/: 


<t'(x,t)-^9(x,t) - <S{x,t)f^<S'(x,t)dx 


. (6.77) 


202 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



To subdue the rather nasty integral in (6.77), Pm going to introduce a clever (but 
not necessarily obvious) mathematical trick. 19 

We’re going to invoke a theorem familiar from first-year calculus that you probably 
know as The Fundamental Theorem of Integral Calculus: 



dx = 


(6.78) 


To apply this theorem to (6.77), we must first rewrite its integrand as a differential, 




d_ 

dx 


d o 


(6.79) 


which transforms the integral into the desirable form 


d 

dt 



dx 


ih_ r°° d_ 

2m J +QO dx 


d *) 


dx. 


(6.80) 


[Notice carefully that I switched the limits of integration in this equation. This is 
not mere caprice; the reason for it will become clear in § 6.7.] 

We can now use Eq. (6.78) to eliminate the integral in our expression (6.77) for 
the rate of change, which becomes 


-f 

dtj_ c 


P(x ) t)dx = — 

V J 2 m 


d 9 


(6.81) 


But according to the boundary condition (6.67 b), each term on the right-hand side of 
(6.81) is zero at the upper and lower limits. So the right-hand side of (6.81) is zero, 
which proves conservation of probability (6.65). 20 

Q.E.D. 


Aside: Introducing Hermiticity. From Eq. (6.81) we can derive an important 
property of the Hamiltonian operator. Take a look at Eq. (6.73/;). We have proven 
that the left-hand side of this equation is zero. Therefore, for any state function 
^(ar.i), the Hamiltonian obeys 



**{x,t)Wb(x t t)dx 



*(:M) [Wtf(rM)]* dx. 


(6.82) 


1 Don’t worry about how you would divine this trick without being shown it. Most of us stumble onto 
such tricks after lots of false starts and errors. As you work through hundreds of physics problems, you will 
discover tricks of your own. But a word to the wise: when you find one, commit it to memory, so it will 
emerge from your subconscious mind when you need it. 

20 This proof can be extended to three-dimensional one-particle systems and to many-particle systems. 
The essential tool is a mathematical result called Green’s Theorem, which can transform an integral over a finite 
volume into an integral over the surface that bounds the volume. You can find the proof for a single-particle 
in three dimensions in § 3-5 of Robert H. Dicke and James P. Wittke, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics 
(Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, I960). For the many-particle case, see § 54 (ii) of Quantum Mechanics, 
Volume II by Sir-Itiro Tomonaga (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1966). 


Sec. 6.5 Is Probability Conserved? 203 



This property is called Hermiticity, and an operator that satisfies such a condition 
is said to be Herniitian. As we shall learn in Chap. 11 , Hermiticity is an important 
property of all quantum mechanical operators. 

Conservation of probability is another brick in the wall of self-consistency that 
supports quantum theory. Without it, the interpretation of ty(x, t) as a position probability 
amplitude would be on shaky ground, because we would have no guarantee that an 
increase in the probability inside a finite region corresponds to a decrease outside the 
region. 

Question 6-6 

Explain why the nonnalization integral (x, t)ty(x, t) dx is independent of time. This 

result guarantees that we need normalize a state function only once. 


Question 6-7 

What would happen to conservation of probability if the TDSE were inhomogeneous ? That 
is, suppose (H - E)^ were equal to a non-zero (but well-behaved) function of x, so that 
the partial time derivative of the state function were given not by Eq. (6.70), but by 

d i * 

— ty{x,t) = -~'H'l!{x,t) + f(x). [an incorrect equation] (6.83) 

ot n 

By repeating the proof of Proclamation 6.1 with this expression for 3^(x, t)/dt, show that 
if the TDSE were inhomogeneous, probability would not be conserved. 


INTERMISSION 


This chapter is a long one; it has 10 sections and 139 equations! You have 
arrived at a way station: a good place to interrupt your study. I recommend taking 
a break—go to a movie, have dinner, go to bed, whatever; then come back, review 
the first five sections, and press on. 


204 


Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



6.6 THE FREE-PARTICLE WAVE PACKET REVISITED 


To illustrate some of the more abstract features of motion in quantum mechanics. I’m 
going to lead you through a detailed study of the evolution of a single state of the 
free particle. The wave function that represents the state we’ll consider is a Gaussian 
free-particle wave packet. We proved in Example 6.3 that such a packet satisfies the 
free-particle TDSE. We’re now going to explore its propagation and change of shape. 
I’ve split this extended example into two sections: here we’ll derive the time dependence 
of 4>(a;,£), and in § 6.7 we’ll consider its physical interpretation. 21 

Wave Packets: A Quick Recap 

Let’s briefly remind ourselves what a wave packet is and how it works. Mathematically 
speaking, a wave packet of the form 

tf(s,0 = -4= / A{k)e i{kx - Ut) dk (6.84) 

V 27T J- oc 

is a linear combination of an infinite number of monochromatic plane waves with infini¬ 
tesimally differing wave numbers. The amplitude function A(k) determines the mixture 
of plane waves in the packet. This function is characterized by its center = (k) and 
its width A k. We calculate A(k) as the Fourier transform of the initial wave packet, 
A(k) = T[*(x,0)}. 

The constituent plane waves of the packet have different wave lengths, and they 
interfere. All of these waves are in phase at the point where total constructive interference 
occurs: the center of the packet {x)(t). At all other values of x, the plane waves interfere 
destructively. The extent of this interference increases as \x - x 0 | increases, so the 
amplitude of the packet decreases with increasing |a; - ® 0 |. This interference gives the 
packet its essential spatially-localized character. 

The Evolution of a Wave Packet 

As the packet (6.84) evolves, its center (x) ( t ) propagates at the group velocity (Chap. 4). 
Let’s place the coordinate origin, x = 0, at the center of the packet at the initial time 
t = 0. Then the propagation of the packet as a whole is characterized by the simple 
equation 


(x) ( t ) = v gr t. (6.85) 

But something more interesting than propagation happens as time passes: the wave 
packet spreads. 

A simple qualitative argument shows why. Think about the propagating wave 
packet as a bundle of monochromatic plane harmonic waves, each moving at its phase 
velocity [Eq. (4.24)] 

co(k) hk 

V\A\ = —j— = -—• [for a free particle] (6.86) 


21 Neither of these sections contains new physical results, so if you are pressed for time, you can jump 
to § 6.8. 


Sec. 6.6 The Free-Particle Wave Packet Revisited 205 



Since the waves in the packet move at different velocities, they disperse as the packet 
propagates. This dispersion inevitably causes the packet to spread as time increases. 
Therefore the position uncertainty A x(t) increases with t. In this section and the next, 
we’ll back up this argument with a (rather elaborate) calculation. 

In Example 6.5, we’re going to solve the TDSE for a state of the free particle 
defined by the (Gaussian) initial condition (see § 4.4) 

/ 1 \ 1/4 

^(a:, °) = (6.87) 

The corresponding amplitude function is 22 

^Z, 2 ^ ' e -(*-*o) 2 £ 2 . (6.88) 

This state is characterized by the statistical quantities (Table 4.1) 

(*>( 0 ) = 0 
(p) (0) = hka 
Ax(0) = L 

AP(0) = A 

Question 6-8 

Prove mathematically (or justify via a careful, rigorous argument) that (6.88) is the correct 
amplitude function for the packet (6.87). 


(6.89a) 

(6.89/7) 

(6.89c) 

(6.89<0 



Example 6.5. The Gaussian Free-Particle State Function 

We must first decide on strategy: Do we attack the TDSE for a free particle (6.30) directly, 
trying to solve it using methods from the theory of partial differential equations? Or is there 
an easier way? 

We know from Chap. 4 that there is an alternate way. (Whether it’s easier remains 
to be seen.) Since we know the amplitude function (6.88), we can write the wave function 
for t > 0 as [Eq. (4.64)] 


fl'OM) = 


J _ 0 




(£) 1/4 /I exp [- £,( * - kof + ixk ~ ^*1 dk ■ 


(6.90 a) 
(6.90/7) 


[In writing (6.90n), I used the dispersion relation for a free particle, (6.31).] If we can eval¬ 
uate this integral analytically, we needn’t bother directly solving the TDSE. For a Gaussian 
initial state, this strategy works like a champ, because we can convert the integral in (6.90/7) 
into a standard fonn that we can look up in tables (or work out analytically). 

To this end, we first transform this integral into one that is independent of the center 
ko of the amplitude function. We just shift the origin of the integral from k = 0 io k = ko 
by changing the dummy variable of integration from k to a new variable u = k - ko. The 


22 The initial wave function (6.87) differs in one small but important respect from Eq. (4.54): the center 
of its amplitude function (6.88) occurs at a non-zero wave number, A:o, rather than at k = 0. Compare this 
amplitude function to Eq. (4.58). 


206 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



differentials for these variables are simply related by dk = du, so in terms of u, the integral 
in (6.90/;) is 


^(M) 


(6.91) 


1?_ 

27T 3 


exp 


—L 2 u 2 + ixu + ixko - i- —( u 2 + 2kou + k%) 
2m 


du. 


Equation (6.91) may not look like an improvement over (6.90/?), but it is. The change of 
variable lets us remove from the integral several factors that do not contain u, viz.. 


ty(x,t) 


L 

2i r 3 


2 \ 1/4 


(6.92) 


e i[to>-«ltJl/(9tn)) / exp |_ ^2 + * Aj j _ (i^t _ ix j „j du . 


( . hk 0 . 


At first glance, this integral looks absolutely ghastly. But with a little work we can 
force it into an integral of the (standard) form (see Appendix J) 


/: 


s - a **-l3u du = /£ e H 2 /4a (Re a > 0] 

V or 


(6.93ar) 


All we need do is define a and /3 in this form as 


a = L 2 + i-^—t 
2m 


r, Mo . ( hko \ 

p = i - 1 — ix = —t x - 1 ) . 

m \ m / 


(6.93 b) 
(6.93c) 


Then we can apply (6.93a) to the wave function for a free-particle wave packet whose initial 
state is the Gaussian (6.87) to get 


^(.T,i) = 


r 2 \ !/4 

L ) p i[k 0 x-hklt/(2in)) 

2?r 3 


^+*27^ 


exp 




(6.94) 


This is the function we seek, the solution of the TDSE (6.30) subject to the initial condition 
(6.87). 

Question 6-9 

Show that you can evaluate the integral in Eq. (6.92) without recourse to integral 
tables by completing the square in the exponential. 


We can write our hard-earned wave function in a more useful form by cleaning 
up the pre-factor; introducing the group velocity v &r = hko/m and the frequency at the 
peak of the amplitude function, u?o = hk%/2m\ and rearranging slightly the exponential, 
to wit: 




_ 

1/4 

_ 

— 



X,t ) = 

1 

e Hk 0 x-«ot) exp 

1 (x — u Rr f) 


(6.95) 



4t2 (i+^0j 



This is the form we’re going to investigate in the next section. 

Sec. 6.6 The Free-Particle Wave Packet Revisited 207 




But first, we’d better check our work. In so complicated a derivation, it’s easy to 
make mistakes. So once you’ve got your answer, ask it lots of questions. For example, 
try evaluating it at a point, a time, or in a limit where you know the correct answer and 
see if it agrees. 

Question 6-10 

Show that the wave function (6.95) at t = 0 reduces to the correct initial condition, 

Eq. (6.87). 

You should also think about whether your result looks sensible. The wave function 
is not merely a mathematical function—it’s supposed to represent a state of a free particle 
with the properties in Eq. (6.89): an (uncertain) momentum, peaked at po = hko, and 
an (uncertain) energy, peaked at Eq — tuoo. Are these properties reflected in the form 
of Eq. (6.95)? 

Finally, we should see what we can deduce from the mathematical result we’ve 
labored over. Staring at the clutter of symbols in Eq. (6.95), we espy the plane harmonic 
wave c »(*o*-«o*), a p Ure momentum function with momentum p 0 and energy Eq. We 
also see that this plane wave is modulated by a x- and f-dependent exponential and by a 
^-dependent prefactor. Although these factors are complicated, if we stare long enough 
at (6.95) we discover that its form is that of a Gaussian. This is a very elegant result: 


Rule 

A function that is a Gaussian at t = 0 remains a Gaussian forever after. 


This rule is illustrated in Fig. 6.4, which shows the real part of the Gaussian state function, 
Re{^(.T,f)}, at three times. 

Question 6-11 

Try to see the Gaussian forest through all the algebraic trees in Eq. (6.95): Can you pick 
off the width A x(t) from this form? (If not, don’t fret. We’ll discuss the width soon.) 


*6.7 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF A GAUSSIAN WAVE PACKET 


To study the “motion” of a microscopic particle, we must investigate the change with 
time of its probability density P(x, t), expectation value (x) ( t ), and uncertainty A x(t). 
We’ll first evaluate the probability density from the wave function (6.95)—an assignment 
that will require some algebraic adeptness. 

The Probability Density for a Gaussian State 


The hard way to obtain an expression for P(x,t) is to substitute ^(a;, t) from (6.95) 
directly into P{x,t) = |^(a;, i)| 2 . But we can easily derive a handy form for this density 
by first simplifying the exponential factor in square brackets in the wave function, which 
for convenience I’ll call F : 


1 (x - v gr t) 2 


(6.96) 


208 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 





t “ to 





Figure 6.4 A schematic plot of the real part of the Gaussian wave packet (6.95) at the 
initial time t = 0 and at three subsequent times, t 0 , 2 to, and 3fo- The center of this 
packet moves at the group velocity u gr = po/m, and the width A.t(£) increases with 
time. [From R. B. Leighton, Principles of Modern Physics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1959).] 


The troublemaker is the innocent-looking i = v/—I in the denominator of this factor. 

Let’s move this i into the numerator by multiplying both numerator and denomi¬ 
nator by the complex conjugate of the offending denominator, viz., 


1 ( a v &rt) (l ^ 2m L 2 

4Z/ 2 (l “*2^7?*) 


(6.97) 


Multiplying the factors in the denominator of (6.97) and putting our new form for F into 
(6.95), we obtain the following form for the free-particle, Gaussian state function: 23 


S'(M) = 


2nL 2 


1/4 


1 


1/2 


l + U 


t 2mT s 
x e i(kox-uj 0 t) 


exp 


1 ( X SmL 2 

4L 2 1 J- hi _/2 

1 ^ 4 1 


(6.98) 


Now we can easily take the complex conjugate of (6.98) and construct the probability 
density 


23 The part of the prefactor in this wave function that normalizes it is (27rL 2 ) 1 / 4 . The rest of the 
prefactor is part of the time dependence of the wave function. 


Sec. 6.7 The Life and Times of a Gaussian Wave Packet 209 


P(x,t) = 


(6.99) 


- 

1/2 



1 

exp 

1 

(x Vg,£) 

[2^(1 + J L > < 2 ). 

~2L2 

1 + . ft* .*2 

1 + 4 1 J 


Question 6-12 

Before pressing on, check my algebra. First fill in the gap between Eqs. (6.98) and (6.99). 
Then confirm from the initial wave function (6.87) that 


P(x,0) 



Then show that (6.99) reduces to this at t = 0. 


( 6 . 100 ) 


In Fig. 6.5, I’ve graphed this probability density at three equally-spaced times. 
These graphs show how the region in which the particle is most likely to be found changes 
with time. The position of the center of this region, ( x ) (<), changes linearly with t , as 
in Eq. (6.85). Such figures are as close as we can come to a pictorial representation of 
the motion of a member of an ensemble of microscopic particles. 



Figure 6.5 The probability densities for the Gaussian wave packet (6.98) at t = 0, 
t = 1, and t = 2. The wave number and initial ( t = 0) width are A’o = 1 and 
L = l/y/2, respectively. 

Figure 6.5 also shows that as t) evolves, P(x,t) changes shape. This is 
the wave packet spreading I alluded to in § 6.6. This odd—and wholly quantum 
mechanical—phenomenon can be seen in the laboratory: the later the time at which we 
perfonn such a measurement, the more likely we are to detect the particle far from the 
center of the packet, { x)(t ). 


210 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



Extracting the Width 


Figure 6.5 graphically illustrates the increase with time of the position uncertainty of a 
free particle with a Gaussian wave function. This phenomenon is the physical conse¬ 
quence of wave packet spreadin g. To scrutinize it q uantitatively, we need an expression 

for this uncertainty, A x(t) = \J(x 2 ) ( t ) — ( x ) 2 (£). We could, of course, just substitute 
the state function (6.98) into each of the expectation values in this expression and start 
integrating. But the resulting algebra is a nightmare. [It’s ( x 2 ) (£), by the way, that 
generates the awkward algebra; we already know ( x ) (£) = hk 0 t/m .] So I’d like to 
describe an alternative approach: extracting the width. 

This stratagem doesn’t always work, but it may save so much work that it’s worth 
a try. The idea is to read the width function directly from the wave function or, in this 
case, from the probability density. First we’ll write the probability density at t = 0 in 
a form that contains the initial width [Eq. (6.89c)], Acc(O) = L. Then we’ll compare 
P(aj,0) to P(x,t) and deduce the width A x(t). 

You derived the probability density at t = 0 for a Gaussian state function, Eq. (6.100), 
when you worked Question 6-12. Replacing L in this equation by Az(0), we have 


P(x t 0) 


27r[Aa;(0)] 2 


d -* 2 /2[A.t(0)J 2 


( 6 . 101 ) 


Now, look at the density for t > 0, Eq. (6.99). Comparing this function to its t = 0 
form (6.101), we find that we can write it as 


P(x,t) 


27r[Aa;(i)] 2 


exp 


(X - Vgrtf 

2[A x(t)l* 


Probability Density for 
a Gaussian Wave Packet ' * ' 


provided the square of the width function is 


[Ax(t)] 2 = i 2 



4m 2 L 4 ) 


[Ax(0)] 2 



ft 2 

4m 2 [Aa;(0)] 4 



(6.103) 


This comparison gives for the position uncertainty for a particle in a state represented 
by a Gaussian wave packet with initial uncertainty Aa;(0) the simple result 


Az(f) = Arc(O) 



h 2 

4m 2 [Aa;(0)] 4 


f 2 . 


[for a Gaussian wave packet] 


(6.104) 


Notice that at t = 0, Eq. (6.104) reduces to Az(0) = L, as it should. 

Using the identification (6.104), we have written P{x, t) in a form that corresponds 
to a Gaussian state function of width A x(t) and that correctly reduces to Eq. (6.100) 
at t = 0. [The form (6.102) also shows explicitly how the probability density depends 
on the statistical quantities that characterize the wave packet, (x) ( t ) and Az(f).] This 
argument does not, of course, constitute a rigorous proof that (6.104) is the correct width, 
but it is highly suggestive. 

Question 6-13 

Evaluate the position uncertainty from the expectation values of ( x 2 ) and (a:). (You may 
not want to do this exercise; you will have to grind through considerable algebra to obtain 
Eq. (6.104). It should, however, convince you of the enonnous amount of work you can 


Sec. 6.7 The Life and Times of a Gaussian Wave Packet 211 



Ax(t) 


save by thinking carefully before you calculate , asking yourself the question: can I get the 
result I need by reasoning rather than manual labor?) 


Middle-Age Spread 

In Fig. 6.6, I’ve graphed the position uncertainty (6.104). This graph vivifies our specu¬ 
lation based on the probability density graphs in Fig. 6.5: the position uncertainty for a 
free particle in a Gaussian state increases with time. And it reveals something new: this 
increase is at first quite gradual, and then becomes linear. The increasing imprecision in 
the position of the particle is a physical consequence of the dispersion of the constituent 
waves in the wave packet. It is one of the marvels of quantum mechanics. 



Figure 6.6 The width A x(t) of the 
Gaussian wave packet as a function of time. 
Initially the packet retains its shape, but 
once the width gets on the linear part of this 
curve, its spreading becomes noticeable. 


Let’s look more closely at the life of a wave packet. Suppose that initially it has 
a well-defined shape, corresponding to a small (but non-zero) width Ax(0). We let the 
packet go, monitoring its career by ensemble measurements of position. 

We can use Eq. (6.104) to predict the results of these measurements. Immediately 
after t = 0, the second term under the square root, ft 2 £ 2 /(4m 2 L 4 ), will remain small 
compared to 1. So at these times the width is, to a good approximation, unchanged: 
A x(t) « Aa;(0) = L. At such times, the spreading of our Gaussian packet is barely 
noticeable: a youthful packet retains its shape. 

But eventually, at times t « 2 mL 2 /h, the width begins to increase more sharply 
(on the linear part of the curve in Fig. 6.6), and the packet, now entering middle-age, 
begins to spread noticeably. 

The rest of the life of our wave packet is not a happy one. For t » 2 mL 2 /h, it 
is bloated and nearly shapeless: A x(t) is enormous. At such times, we know almost 
nothing about where the particle is likely to be found, because the position uncertainty 
is huge. In the limit t —> oo, the packet loses all definition. In this limit, we can no 
longer even meaningfully define its center, and we know nothing about the particle’s 
location. This spreading and ultimate loss of definition of a wave packet is inevitable—a 
consequence not of external forces or even poor dietary habits, but of natural law. 

212 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



Uncertainties Galore 


So far I’ve focused on the position uncertainty, partly because this quantity is directly 
related to the spreading of the wave packet (and partly because I think it’s more interesting 
than the momentum uncertainty). Still, to complete the story of the Gaussian function, 
we ought to look at A p and the uncertainty product Ax(t) A p. 

The momentum uncertainty is a little less interesting than Arc because it doesn’t 
change. Since the amplitude function A(k) [and hence the momentum probability am¬ 
plitude <F(p)] for a free particle is independent of t (Chap. 4), so is the momentum 
uncertainty, 

A p(t) = Ap(0) = 4-. (6.105) 

[From now on I’ll drop the superfluous argument from A p.] 

The position and momentum uncertainties must obey the omnipresent Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle (HUP), Ar v(t) A p > 6/2, which requirement provides a dandy 
way to verify our work in this section. Using Eqs. (6.98), we find that the uncertainty 
product at t = 0 is Arc(0) A p = 6/2, the smallest value the HUP allows! This is a very 
unusual occurrence—equality in the HUP—and it occurs only for the Gaussian wave 
packet at t = 0. It is why physicists refer to this packet as the minimum uncertainty 
wave packet. 

We know that the HUP will be satisfied for t > 0, because A x(t) increases with 
time and A p doesn’t change. More quantitatively, their product increases as 


&x{t)Ap = L — 


'1 + 


h 2 


Am 2 L A 


t 2 


= 711 + 


h 2 


4 m 2 L 4 


t 2 [for a Guassian Wave Function] 


(6.106#) 

(6.1066) 


[Notice that only at t = 0 is the uncertainty product independent of the initial width of 
the packet, Az(O) = L.] 

Question 6-14 

Gazing intently at the state functions in Fig. 6.4, we notice that the local wavelength of the 
oscillations on either side of the center of the packet at the times shown. 


<*)„ (*o) 


npoto 

m 


(6.107) 


are smaller on the right than on the left. Explain this observation. (Hint: The wavelength 
is inversely proportional to the momentum.) 


In this section we have plumbed the depths of a Gaussian wave packet. I hope this 
extended example has helped you develop an intuition for how a typical state function 
evolves. The phenomena we’ve seen—propagation of the packet at the group velocity 
and spreading—are characteristic of nearly all (non-stationary) wave functions. But in 
some systems, spreading takes on bizarre characteristics: if a microscopic particle is 
bound in the potential of a simple harmonic oscillator potential, the packet sloshes back 
and forth in the well. But to see this, you’ll have to wait ’til Chap. 9. 

Sec. 6.7 The Life and Times of a Gaussian Wave Packet. 213 



6.8 PROBABILITY FLUID AND ITS FLOW 


The pictures in Figs. 6.5 of the Gaussian probability density at three times suggests 
an analogy to the evolution of a quantum state. It is as though there is a current of 
“probability fluid” that flows through space. At any fixed time, the density of this fluid 
is largest where the particle is most likely to be found. This analogy is the basis of an 
extremely useful concept—the probability current density—which affords us new insight 
into quantum motion. 24 

A Notion of Motion 

To introduce the idea of a probability current, let’s think about an ensemble measurement 
of position. Consider a detector fixed somewhere on the x axis, as in the region [a, b) in 
Fig. 6.7a. Suppose an ensemble of particles is incident on the detector from the left, i.e., 
in the direction of increasing x, in a quantum state represented by a wave packet t). 
The detector measures the position probability by counting the number of particles that 
it registers per unit time. 

An actual detector measures the probability in a finite interval, which I’ll denote 
[a, 6]. The quantum mechanical quantity this device measures is the integrated probability 
of § 3.4 [Eq. (3.26)], 

probability of detection in [a, b] 

= P([a,b],t) = f P{x,t)dx = 

J a 

We interpret this quantity (in the gospel according to Born) as the probability that in an 
ensemble measurement of position at time t, we’ll find the particle in the detector region 
[a, 6]. In practice, then, P([a,b],t) is what we measure when we measure position. 

Let’s see how the integrated probability changes with time. Initially (i.e., at t = 0), 
the state function is localized far from the detector at (x) (0) (Fig. 6.7a). At this time, 
then, the detector registers P ([a, 6],0) « 0. 25 As time passes, the particle moves in the 
direction of increasing x, first into and then out of the detector region—a process shown 
in the “snapshots” of Figs. 6.7b-6.7d. What happens to P([a, 6],£) while this is going 
on? 

Well, the first change in this quantity occurs at the time t\ > 0 when the particle is 
close enough to the detector that this device measures a non-zero probability P ([a, 6], t \). 
Thereafter, P([a,b\,t) increases until the time £2 when the maximum of P(x ) t) is very 

24 Probability flow is included here because the associated derivations and concepts follow closely from 
the material in the previous sections. But if you want to get on to Chap. 7, you can defer § 6.8 and 6.9 until 
you begin studying one-dimensional scattering in Chap. 8. If you choose this option, insert these two sections 
just before § 8.2. 

25 Strictly speaking, there might be a minute position probability within [a, 6]—if, for example, the 
wave packet is a Gaussian, which never equals zero for finite x. But since the accuracy of real detectors is 
limited, we can always arrange the apparatus so that (,t)( 0) is large enough to give a negligible reading. Note, 
by the way, that throughout this discussion we’re ignoring the details of the interaction of the particle with 
the detector. The difficult question of how a measuring apparatus interacts with the particle whose properties 
it is measuring, is treated in advanced books, such as Measurement and Time Reversal in Objective Quantum 
Theory by F. J. Belinfante (New York: Pergamon, 1975). 

,214 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 


/ 
J a 


( 6 . 108 ) 


\^(x,t )\ 2 dx. 



<x)(0) 


a 


b 


x 


t = 0 

I nitial condition P( [a, b], 0) ~ 0 

(a) 




(c) 



Figure 6.7 One-dimensional probability flow in a beam, (a) Initially, the particles are 
so far from the detector region [a, b) that the detector registers zero. Sketches (b)-(d) 
show the gradual encroachment by the packet on the space defined by the detector: (b) 
As ensemble nears the detector, more and more of the probability density is within the 
detector region [a, 6]. Consequently the integrated probability P([a, 6]; t) increases until 
(c) time f 2 , when it attains its maximum, (d) As the particle moves on, the measured 
probability dies to zero. 


near the detector (Fig. 6.7c). After this, P([a, 6],i) decreases, ultimately returning to an 
immeasurably small value when the packet no longer significantly overlaps the region 
[a, b] (i.e., t > t 3 in Fig. 6.7d). These qualitative changes in the integrated probability 
are sketched in Fig. 6.8. Notice that the probability density for 0 < t < is definitely 
not in steady state: P ([a, 6], t) changes with time. So the rate of change of this quantity, 
dP ([a,6],£) /dt, is not zero. 


Sec. 6.8 Probability Fluid and Its Flow 215 



P{[a, b]\ t) 


PiU bh 


Slope = ^ P(x, f)| f = f2 



Figure 6.8 The integrated probability 
measured by the detector in Fig. 6.7. Note 
that the rate of change of the probability 
in the region [a, 6] is not constant. This 
change is what we mean by probability 
flow. 


Go with the Flow 

The notion of probability flow is implicit in our qualitative discussion of the change 
in the integrated probability. We can imagine a “probability fluid” that flows into and 
then out of the detector region. As the amount of probability fluid in [a, 6] increases (or 
decreases), the detector is more (or less) likely to register the presence of a particle. In 
this quaint picture, probability flows as the state function ^(a z,t) evolves according to 
the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation. 

Be careful not to get carried away with this appealing analogy. We use the notion 
of probability flow to envision rather subtle physical behavior and to cast the equations 
of quantum mechanics into a form similar to those of other fields: e.g ., electricity and 
magnetism (flow of charge in a wire) and hydrodynamics (flow of gunk in a sewer pipe). 
But remember that neither the state function nor the probability density actually exists 
in the laboratory. If anything can rigorously be said to “flow” in quantum theory, it is 
information, for that is the physically significant content of ^(x,t) and P(x,t). So take 
heed: 


WARNING 

Thou must not take probability fluid too seriously. Probability fluid does not exist in 
real space; “probability flow” is colorful language designed to create in your mind a 
picture, an analog of the evolution of a quantum system. 


With this caution out of the way, we turn to the quantitative incarnation of the concept 
of probability flow, the probability current density. 

Introducing the Probability Current Density 

We’ve found that a key quantity for describing probability flow is the rate of change of 
the integrated probability within a finite region [a, 6], 

j t P([a,b], t) = ^~ t J P{x,t)dx = -Jl J 'k*{x,t)'y{x,t)dx. (6.109) 

To introduce the probability current density, I want to rewrite Eq. (6.109) in a form 
very similar to the equation we derived in § 6.5 for the rate of change of the integrated 
probability for infinite interval , Eq. (6.81). Because the little derivation that follows 
draws heavily on the proof of Proclamation 6.1 (conservation of probability), I want you 


216 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 




to stop now, go back, and review the algebra leading to Eq. (6.81). The vital point I 
want you to appreciate is that at no point in the derivation of this equation did we use 
the fact that the interval was infinite. 

This observation makes it easy to adapt Eq. (6.81) to the finite interval [a, 6], as 
required by Eq. (6.109). We just replace the limits -oo and +oo in that equation by the 
finite values a and b, leaping over mounds of algebra to land on 

rb 


4 - [ P(x,t)dx = 
dt J„ *■ ’ ' 2 m 


O r\ 

V(x,t)—*{x,t) - 


( 6 . 110 ) 


Jb 


Look at the structure of Eq. (6.110). Writing it out in full, we find the right-hand 
side to be the difference of two terms, the first of which is evaluated at the left boundary 
of the detector region, x = a, and the second at the right boundary, x = b 

rb 


jtL p{x ' t)dx ={-£ 






(iff 

\ 2m 




x=b 


( 6 . 111 ) 


This structure suggests that we define a function of x and t to represent these terms. 
This function is the probability current density: 




r\ r\ 

- y( x ,t)—V (x,t) 


probability current 
density 


( 6 . 112 ) 


Armed with this definition, we can write Eq. (6.111) in a clearer form, which is 
called the rate equation for probability flow: 


-^P([a,b],t) = j(a,t)-j(b,t) 


rate equation for probability flow ( 6 . 113 ) 


Note that 


1. the probability current density j(x,t) is evaluated from the state function t) 
and, in general, depends on x and on t\ 

2. is used as in Eq. (6.113) to calculate the rate at time t of probability flow 
through a finite region. 

After a brief example, we’ll discuss the physical meaning of the probability current 
density and the rate equation. 

Question 6-15 

To gain familiarity with the definition of the probability current density, show that the 
following alternate forms of j{x,t) are equivalent to Eq. (6.112): 


j(x,t) = — Im 
m 




(6.114a) 


where Im[ ... ] means “take the imaginary part of the function in square brackets,” and 


1 


j(*.0 = —Re [^*(x,i)p^(®,Q], 


(6.114/A 


where p is the momentum operator and Re[ ... ] means “take the real part of the complex 
function in square brackets.” 


Sec. 6.8 Probability Fluid and Its Flow 217 





Question 6-16 

True or False : The function — [ih/(2m)]dP(x,t)/dt is equivalent to the right-hand side of 
Eq. (6.112). 


Example 6.6. Probability Current for a Pure Momentum Function 

The definition (6.112) of the probability current density is rather complicated and abstract, so 
let’s apply it to a very simple function of x and t : a pure momentum function. 26 Specifically, 
consider a pure momentum function corresponding to momentum po = hko and energy 
E 0 — hu>o, 


typ 0 (x,t) = Ae i{pox ~ E ot >/\ (6.115) 

[In this example, I won’t choose A = \f\j2-nh, as I did in Chap. 4. Letting A remain 
arbitrary frees us to renormalize the pure momentum function in a way that is useful in the 
study of collisions (see § 6.9).] To evaluate the probability current density for ^ po (x,t), 
we just substitute the form (6.115) into the definition (6.112) of j(x,t), obtaining 


j(x } t) = \A\ 2 '^-. 

m 


[for a pure momentum state] 


(6.116) 


The probability current density (6.116) for a pure momentum function thus corre¬ 
sponds to steady state probability flow, as you can see from the rate equation (6.113). Since 
the current density is independent of position, i.e., j(a,t) = j(b,t) for any finite region 
[a, 6], this equation becomes 

■~P([a t b\ ) t)= 0. [for a pure momentum function] (6.117) 

at 

So the integrated probability for a pure momentum state does not change with time and is 
independent of position. That is, the probability fluid associated with a pure momentum 
function is homogeneous and uniform, and its flow rate is constant. Please note that the 
pure momentum function is a very special case\ in general the probability current density is 
a complicated function of x and t —see Pblm. 6.6. 


Aside: An Artificial Analogy. I remarked above that we can use the proba¬ 
bility flow (and its current) to write equations of quantum mechanics in a form 
similar to those of other fields. To show you how, I’ll transform Eq. (6.116). 
For a pure momentum function, we have 


hko = po, po/m = -Ugr and |j4| 2 = P(x,t). 


So we can write our expression for the probability current density for this 
function in the (slightly artificial) way 


j(x,t) = P{x,t)v gr . 


This form shows that we can consider the probability current density as the 
product of a probability fluid density and the flow velocity v gr of this fluid. 
Similar results are obtained in hydrodynamic and electromagnetic theory. 


2c This is no mere academic exercise. To see how we might use this function in an application, consider 
again Fig. 6.6. Suppose that when the particles reach the detector, their wave function is very fat [e.g., A .t(£) 
is huge for t\ < t < £2 in Fig- 6.7.] Then the momentum distribution of this state will be sharply peaked 
about the value po = hko tie., Ap is teeny). To the detector, which can “see” only the finite region (a, 6], 
such a packet looks like a pure momentum function with wave number A:o and frequency tvo = hkQ/2m. For 
more on modeling a wave packet with a pure momentum function, see Chap. 8. 


218 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



To make this example concrete, let’s evaluate the probability current density for a 
beam of electrons in a state that can be approximated by the pure momentum function we 
investigated in § 5.3, Eq. (5.15): 

V(x,t) = (5.375 x 10 2 m~ 2 ) exp{i[(4.9 x 10 12 m _, )x - (5.8 x 10 18 sec _1 )£]}.(6.118) 

To evaluate j(x, t) for this state, we read off (6.118) the values \A\ = 5.375 x 10 2 m _1/2 
and ko = 4.9 x 10 12 m _1 . Inserting these values and the rest mass of the electron, m e = 
9.109 x 10 -31 kg, into Eq. (6.116), we get j = 1.639 x 10 -10 sec -1 . {Notice the units.) 

But What Does the Probability Current Density Mean? 

At this point, our understanding of the probability current density is based on qualitative, 
intuitive arguments. Such arguments are fine as far as they go—but they don’t go far 
enough. We need a precise physical interpretation. 

To find one, we’ll go back to the rate equation (6.113), integrate it over a finite time 
interval, and then think about the resulting equation in terms of the Born interpretation 
and probability flow. This rate equation, 

^P([a,6],£) = j(a,t) - (6.119) 

describes the change in P ((a, 6], t) per infinitesimal time element dt. If we integrate this 
equation over the finite time interval At = t? — t\, we obtain 

^P([a,6],£) dt = Jt j(a, t)dt — j(b ) t)dt. (6.120) 

Now, the left-hand side of (6.120) is the integral of a total derivative, so it’s just [see 
Eq. (6.78)] 


J* ~P([a } blt)dt = (6.121) 

Physically, this quantity is the change in the integrated probability in the interval [a, b] 
during the interval At. I’ll denote this change by the rather baroque symbol AP([a, 6], 
Af). The resulting time-integrated rate equation (6.120) is the key that unlocks the 
interpretation of the probability current density: 


AP([a,&],At) = P([a,6],£ 2 )-P([a,6],t 1 ) 


j(a, t) dt 



( 6 . 122 ) 


This equation says that the change in the (integrated) probability in the detector 
region during the finite interval At is equal to the difference of two quantities. To see 
what these quantities mean, we must consider what could cause in this change. There 
are two possibilities: 


1. probability could flow into [a, 6] at x = a; 

2. probability could flow out of [a, 6] at x = b. 


Sec. 6.8 Probability Fluid and Its Flow 219 



We find on the right-hand side of the integrated rate equation (6.122) a term that represents 
each of these causes: the first term, f** j(a , t ) dt, is the amount of probability that enters 
the region [a, 6] at x = a during the interval At. And fj* j(b,t)dt is the amount that 
leaves the region at b during this interval. 27 

This way of thinking about (6.122) suggests that we interpret the probability current 
density j(xo, t) at the point x 0 and time t as the instantaneous rate of probability flow 
in the direction of increasing x. Be sure you understand the directional quality of the 
probability current density. This feature is implicit in the integrated rate equation (6.122). 
Suppose, for example, that the change in the integrated probability, AP ([a, b], At), is 
positive. Then the net probability in the detector region increases during At. In this 
case j/ 2 j(a, t) dt must be greater than fj* j{b> t) dt. So in order to make our definition 
of j(x,t) consistent with Eq. (6.122), we must ensure that a positive current density 
corresponds to probability flow in the +x direction. Similarly, a negative probability 
current density must correspond to probability flow in the -x direction. 

Summary 


I began this section by deriving the rate equation for probability flow through a finite 
region, Eq. (6.113), the mathematical structure of which led us to introduce the probability 
current density of Eq. (6.112). Then, reasoning from the integrated rate equation (6.122), 
I argued for an interpretation of j(x,t) that is consistent with this equation and Born’s 
idea of basing the interpretation of quantum mechanical quantities on probability. To 
summarize our findings, here’s a recap of the key quantities of this section: 


the instantaneous rate at which position probability 
j{x,t) = crosses the point x at time t , moving in the +x (6.123 a) 

direction 


j(x,t)dt 


the amount of position probability that passes x 
during the interval At = t 2 — t\ 


(6.123ft) 


You’ll find an accompanying summary of the key equations of this section (and of 
§ 6.9) in Table 6.1. 


TABLE 6.1 SUMMARY OF KEY RESULTS FOR THE PROBABILITY CURRENT DENSITY 
IN ONE AND THREE DIMENSIONS 


One dimension 

Three dimensions 

for a finite interval [a, 6) 

j(x,t) is a signed scalar equal to 

£P(*,() + £j(x,t)=0 

for a volume V bounded by surface S 

j(r, t) is a vector equal to 
- & l**( r > 0V*(r, t) - *(r, O'V** (r,«)] 

£P(r,0 + V-j(r,0 = 0 

fLp(M.t) = 0-i(M> 

fJ v P(r,t)dv + / s j(r,<)-<fa = 0 


27 Remeniber that we’re considering particles moving in the direction of increasing x. So we needn’t 
worry about probability fluid leaving the detector region at x = a or entering this region at x = 6. These 
cases would be appropriate, however, to particles moving to the left. 


220 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



Aside: Pointwise Conservation of Probability. The rate equation (6.119) shows 
that in general, the probability in a finite region is not conserved (the exception is the 
pure momentum function of Example 6.6), i.e., 

|p([a,6],t)#0. (6.124) 

But by recasting the rate equation in differential form, we discover a mathematical 
result that proves that probability is conserved at a point: 

d c) 

■j^P{x,t) + — j{x,t) = 0. pointwise conservation of probability (6.125) 

This law is the most elemental form of the relationship between the probability density 
and the probability current density. 

Since we can regain the rate equation (6.119) from this “pointwise” form by in¬ 
tegrating (6.125) over the detector region [a, 6] (see Pblm. 6.1), it makes sense to con¬ 
sider Eq. (6.125) as the bottom rung of a “hierarchical ladder” of rate equations. These 
equations are summarized in Table 6.1, which also includes their three-dimensional 
counterparts from § 6.9. 

Aside: More on Artificial Analogies. The mathematical structure of the differential 
equation (6.125) may look familiar from your study of electricity and magnetism. In 
the physics of the flow of electric charge, the fundamental equation relating the charge 
at point x and time t, Q(x,t), to the electric current density J(x, t) is 

^Q(x,f) + = 0, (6.126) 

which bears a striking structural similarity to Eq. (6.125). The current through a 
region [a, 6] is just 


I = J(b,t) - J(a,t). (6.127) 

This is the flux associated with this flux of charge. Equations (6.125) and 
(6.126) belong to an important class of physical relations called equations of conti¬ 
nuity. 28 


6.9 PROBABILITY FLOW IN THE LABORATORY 

In this section, we’ll use the probability current density to describe a beam of electrons in 
a collision experiment such as the one shown schematically in Fig. 6.9. Laboratories are 
three-dimensional, so we expect that we’ll need the generalization to three dimensions of 
the one-dimensional equations of § 6.8. But once we have these generalizations in hand, 
we’ll discover that in many experiments we can use their one-dimensional counterparts 
after all. 


Beam 



Unit area 


Figure 6.9 A beam experiment in the 
laboratory. The beam travels along the x 
direction perpendicular to the unit area 
shown; this unit area plays a key role in 
the interpretation of the three-dimensional 
probability current density, Eq. (6.133). 


28 For a more detailed discussion of this analogy see § 9.3 of An Introduction to Quantum Physics by 
A. P. French and E. F. Taylor (New York: W. W. Norton, 1978). 


Sec. 6.9 Probability Flow in the Laboratory 221 



The Probability Current Density in 3D 

There are three essential differences between the situation in one dimension and that in 
the laboratory. The first concerns the wave function that appears in the definition of the 
probability current density. In § 6.8, this wave function depended on only one spatial 
coordinate, x. But a quantum state of a system in three dimensions is represented by 
a wave function that depends on the three spatial coordinates x , y, and z, so we must 
calculate the current density from such a function. 

Second, we must take account of the three independent orthogonal directions in 
the lab, as specified by the unit vectors e x , e y , and e z . To describe probability flow in 
the lab we need three signed quantities: j x (x,t) for flow in the x direction, j y {x,t ) for 
the y direction, and j z {x,t) for the 2 direction. Hence the probability current density 
for a quantum state in three dimensions is a vector: 

j(r,f) = e x j x {r i t) + e y jy(r ) t) + e 2 j z {r,t). (6.128) 

Finally, in three dimensions we specify a finite region, such as the one that appears 
in the rate equations for probability flow, by a finite volume V delimited by a boundary 
surface 5, as shown in Fig. 6.10. 



Figure 6.10 In three dimensions, 
probability flow is defined in terms of a 
finite volume V. The surface S bounds this 
volume. The unit area r/a of this surface is 
assigned a direction: normal to and outward 
from the surface. The arrows outside the 
volume in this figure symbolically suggest 
the flow of “probability fluid.” [Adapted 
from Introduction to Quantum Mechanics 
by R. H. Dicke and J. P. Whittke (Reading, 
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, I960).] 


To generalize the equations of § 6.8, we merely translate them from one to three 
dimensions, taking into account these three differences. Central to the description of 
probability flow is the integrated probability inside a finite region, Eq. (6.108). In three 
dimensions, this quantity is a three-fold integral over the finite volume V, i.e., 

probability of detection in volume V = P([V],t) 

= / P(r, t) dv = 

Jv 

In this volume integral, dv is an infinitesimal volume element. (For ex¬ 
ample, in rectangular coordinates dv = dxdydz\ and in spherical coordinates, 
dv = r 2 dr sin Odd d<j>.) 

The definition of the probability current density for the state ^(r, t) is the general¬ 
ization of Eq. (6.112). The only tricky thing about this generalization is accommodating 
the dependence of the wave function on r rather than only on x. We accomplish this by 
replacing the partial derivative d/dx in (6.112) with the gradient operator 

d c) & 

v = e x — + e y — + e z — . (6.130a) 


L 


dv. 


(6.129) 


222 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



With this change, the probability current density for a single particle in three dimensions 
is 


J(M) = [**(r,i)V®(r,t) - $(M)vr(r,t)] 


(6.130Z?) 


Finally, we want to generalize the rate equation (6.113). Here’s the one-dimensional 
equation, with all terms collected on the left-hand side: 


jP ([a, 6], t) + [j{b } t) - j(a , t)\ = 0. 


[the one-dimensional rate equation] (6.131) 


Look at the quantity in square brackets. It’s the difference of two terms. One represents 
probability flowing out of the one-dimensional “volume” [a, 6] at x = 6; the other, 
probability flowing into this volume at x = a. If you think of the boundaries of this 
interval as a one-dimensional surface and examine Fig. 6.10 carefully, you can probably 
guess the counterpart of this quantity for a three-dimensional system. It’s just the surface 
integral of the component of the three-dimensional probability current density on the 
infinitesimal element of area da in this figure. With this modification, the rate equation 
for a three-dimensional quantum state becomes 

j t jf P(M)du + J j(r, <) ■ da = 0. (6.132) 

Finally, we must generalize our interpretation of the probability current density, 
Eq. (6.123a). To this end, I want to remind you of how we describe a beam of macro¬ 
scopic particles in classical physics. Imagine that the beam in Fig. 6.9 consists of such 
particles. The particle density for such a beam is the average number of particles per 
unit length of the beam. But in the classical theory of scattering, the most useful quantity 
is the classical flux density , the number of particles that crosses a unit area perpendicular 
to the beam per unit time. (The units of the classical flux density are particles/sec-m 2 .) 
By calculating the classical flux through a surface, we can quantitatively determine the 
rate of flow of the particles in the beam. 29 

Now, the important aspect of this description for our generalization of the inter¬ 
pretation (6.131) is the recognition that in three dimensions we must define quantities 
related to a current (rate of flow) in terms of a unit area normal to the direction of the 
current. So for a three-dimensional system, we have 


the instantaneous rate (at position r and time t) at 
j(r,i) = which position probability crosses a unit area per- (6.133) 

pendicular to the direction of flow. 


To clarify this interpretation and to show how j(r,£) is used in practice, we’ll look at a 
real-world example in a moment. 


29 For an introduction to fluid flow in classical physics, see Chap. 8 of Mechanics by Keith R. Symon 
(Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1971). The flux density, which is also known as the intensity , is the basis 
of the definition of the classical cross section. For a clear description of classical scattering, see § 3.10 of 
Classical Mechanics, 2nd ed. by Herbert Goldstein (Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1980), or, if you have 
the first edition of this classic text, § 3.7. 


Sec. 6.9 Probability Flow in the Laboratory 223 




One-Dimensional Probability Flow in Three Dimensions 


Happily, we usually don’t always have to cope with vectors, volume integrals, and 
gradients when we deal with probability flow in the analysis of an experiment. In many 
cases, we can use only the x component of j(r,£) and, in fact, can use the equations in 
§ 6.8. The justification for this wondrous simplification rests on the form of the three- 
dimensional equations we just wrote down and on the physical nature of the beams used 
in many experiments. 

Suppose that as particles flow from the source to the target, their beam undergoes 
very little dispersion along directions perpendicular to its axis of flow. Then we can 
treat the beam (to a very good approximation) as flowing in one direction only—which, 
as in Fig. 6.9, we define to be the x axis. This assumption is well within the realm of 
modem experimental techniques; e.g., in state-of-the-art low energy electron scattering 
experiments, the dispersion of the incident electron beam is less than three degrees about 
the beam axis. In this case, the y and z components of j(r,£) are negligible, and we 
need contend with only ^(r, t). 

But this situation does not automatically reduce the equations of this section to 
their one-dimensional counterparts. The a-component of the probability current density 
still depends on x, y, and z because, according to Eq. (6.131), it’s determined from the 
wave function ^(r, t), as 


/ v ih 
^ T ' t) = -^n 




(6.134) 


But this expression contains only partial derivatives with respect to x. If we could 
neglect the dependence of ^(r, t) on y and z, then Eq. (6.134) would reduce to the one¬ 
dimensional expression (6.112), which would justify our using the equations of § 6.8 
without modification. Under certain conditions, neglect of the y and z dependence of 
the wave function is a very good approximation. Here’s an example. 

Suppose the conditions of the experiment justify our modeling the wave function 
\P(r,£) by the plane wave 

tf(r,£) » A(ko)e l ' (ko r " u;ot) . (6.135a) 


If the beam is well collimated along the x axis, as assumed above, then we can approx¬ 
imate k 0 in (6.135a) by k 0 e x . With this approximation, the dot product in the exponent 
simplifies as k 0 • r = k^x, and the plane wave function depends only on x and t, i.e ., 

4>(r, t) ss A(k 0 ) (6.1356) 

So for such a plane wave, the probability current density (6.134) depends only on x 
and t, and we can fully describe probability flow using the one-dimensional equations 
of § 6.8. In Example 6.7, I’ll apply this model to an actual laboratory situation. 

Aside: More on the Plane Wave Model. The plane wave function (6.135a) is a 
good approximation to a very fat wave packet— i.e., one whose amplitude function 
A(k) is very sharply peaked about the average wave vector ko of the particles in the 
beam. This requirement is met by a nearly monoenergetic beam, because the energy 
uncertainty of the state of the particles in such a beam is very small. This implies 
a small momentum uncertainty. [Since th e particles are free (i.e., non-interacting), 
these uncertainties are related by A p = yJm((2Eo) AS.] And a small momentum 
uncertainty implies a large position uncertainty: a fat packet. Moreover, if this 
uncertainty. Ax, is much larger than the dimensions of the target, then the further 


224 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



approximation of (6.135/;) seems reasonable—and it can be justified by rigorous 
analysis. 

Example 6.7. A Model Wave Function for a Collision Experiment 

The most we usually know about a beam in the laboratory is its electrical current and 
the mean energy E 0 of the particles in it. For example, in the 1980’s atomic physicists 
can produce nearly monoenergetic beams of electrons of (mean) kinetic energy 0.01 eV in 
which a current of 3.0 x 10 - ’ 5 amp flows through a 1 m 2 area perpendicular to the beam. 30 
To represent the quantum state of the beam in such an experiment by a pure momentum 
function (6.1356), we must determine from this data the physical quantities that appear in 
this function: tuo, ko, and Aq. 

We can easily calculate the values of u; 0 and k 0 from the energy E 0 : 

E 

OJO = = 1.520 x 10 14 sec -1 . (6.136a) 

And from the momentum, 

Po = \/2m£„ = 1.708 x 10 -25 kg-m-sec -1 , (6.136/;) 

we get the wave number 

*o = ^ = 1-621 x 10 9 m -1 . (6.136c) 

All that remains is the amplitude A of the pure momentum function. It’s convenient 
to choose this constant so that P(x, t) = |A| 2 is equal to the relative probability density in 
the beam. To this end, let’s pick |A| 2 to be the average particle density in the beam—i.e., 
the average number of particles per unit length of the beam that passes through a unit area 
perpendicular to the beam. With this normalization, we can easily determine |A| from the 
beam current. 31 

To do so, we must relate the beam current, which in this example is 3.0xl0 -5 C/sec -1 
to the probability current density j. Then we can easily calculate \A\, because Eq. (6.116) 
gives us this number in terms of j as 

A = n. 

V p°/ 

Now the electric current I is a measure of the rate of flow of charge in the beam, while j 
is a measure of the rate of flow of position probability density. In our interpretation for the 
pure momentum function, j is the number of particles per second incident on a unit area 
perpendicular to the beam (i.e., along the x axis and in the yz plane). In this experiment an 
electrical charge of 3.0 x 10“ 5 C-sec -1 through a 1 m 2 area in the yz plane, so the number 
of electrons (of charge q = 1.602 x 10 _19 C) corresponding to this current is 

• 3 x io -5 

3 = j~6 Q2 x 10~ 19 = L873 X lol4e,ectrons / sec - (6.138) 

If we substitute this value of j , Eq. (6.136/;) for p 0 , and the value of the electron rest mass 
m e = 9.109 x 10 -31 kg into Eq. (6.137), we obtain A = 3.161 x 10 4 m _1/2 . 

We can now write down the form of a plane wave that approximates this beam: 

^(r, t) = (3.161 x 10 4 m“ 3/2 )exp{i(1.621 x 10 9 m _1 )x 

it . (6.139) 

-(1.520 x 10 14 sec -1 )/}. 


(6.137) 


;1,, See H. S. W. Massey, Atomic and Molecular Collisions (London: Taylor and Francis LTD, 1979). 

31 The disadvantage to this choice is that the resulting pure momentum function no longer satisfies the 
Dirac Delta function normalization condition (4.28). But this is a small price to pay for the convenience of 
modeling the beam with the plane wave. 


Sec. 6.9 Probability Flow in the Laboratory 225 



As promised, this plane wave depends only on x and i. 

A final note: I have taken pains in this example to include units on all the physical 
quantities and in the plane wave (6.139). Newcomers to quantum physics often focus so 
intently on the equations and functions of the theory that they lose sight of these important 
dimensional indicators. To help you avoid such waywardness, I’ve summarized the units of 
key quantities in Table 6.2. 


TABLE 6.2 UNITS 



One dimension 

Three dimensions 

State function 

m- 1 / 2 

m -3 / 2 

Probability density 

m- 1 

m" 3 

Probability current density 

sec -1 

sec -1 m -2 


Question 6-17 

Figure out the units of the state function, probability density, and probability current density 
of a single particle in two dimensions (e.g., confined to move in a two-dimensional plane). 
Try to generalize the equations in Table 6.1 to this case. 


6.10 FINAL THOUGHTS: QUANTUM CAUSALITY 

The time-dependent Schrodinger Equation is undeniably one of the great intellectual 
achievements of science. It laid the foundation on which physicists built our current 
theories of the physics of matter. Other physicists have performed a vast number of 
experiments the results of which have verified these theories. Armed with this hindsight, 
it’s interesting to see how the TDSE was initially received. 

The distinguished physicist Wolfgang Pauli (1900-1958) has vividly described 
the attitude of the physics community during the years prior to the publication of 
Schrodinger’s paper: 32 “Physics is very muddled again at the moment; it is much too 
hard for me anyway, and I wish I were a movie comedian or something like that and 
had never heard anything about physics!” From this comment you might guess that 
Schrodinger’s achievement was greeted with cheers. Wrong. 

Not all members of the physics community expressed delight when confronted 
with Schrodinger’s work. Although Max Planck and the renowned Dutch physicist H. 
A. Lorentz (1853-1938) waxed enthusiastic over his theory, no less a luminary than 
Werner Heisenberg, in a letter to Pauli, wrote, 33 “The more I ponder about the physical 
part of Schrodinger’s theory, the more disgusting it appears to me.” Still, Heisenberg’s 
revulsion notwithstanding, the TDSE quickly dominated quantum theory, eclipsing for a 
time Heisenberg’s alternative, matrix mechanics. 


32 Quoted in Theoretical Physics in the Twentieth Century , edited by M. Fierz and V. F. Weisskopf 
(New York: Interscience, 1960), p. 22. 

33 Quoted in Max Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1966), p. 272. Writing about Heisenberg’s work in a paper in the Annaien der Physik [79, 734 (1926)] 
Schrodinger comments that he was “discouraged if not repelled by what appeared to me a rather difficult 
method of transcendental algebra, defying any visualization.” 


226 


Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 




Now that we have completed our study of the four basic postulates of quantum 
theory, let’s step back momentarily from the mechanics of quantum physics to consider 
its philosophical implications. 

In Chap. 1, I noted that the new physics of Heisenberg, Schrodinger, and Bom 
dealt a severe blow to traditional philosophical tenets such as determinism and causality. 
But the TDSE restores to physics a strange kind of causality. Before explaining this 
curious comment, I want to summarize the philosophical situation before the advent of 
this equation. 

The notion of cause and effect in the evolution of individual systems was a mainstay 
of the mechanistic philosophy that dominated the nineteenth century. This philosophy 
was based on Newton’s Laws, but it extrapolated the purview of those laws to the 
whole of existence. In the 19th century, as today, Newtonian physics described not the 
whole universe, but rather any closed (i.e., finite) mechanical system. The crucial leap 
from physics to philosophy was taken by the French astronomer and mathematician (and 
Napoleon’s minister of the interior) Pierre Simon, marquis de Laplace (1749-1827). In 
his treatise “Theorie analytique des probabilities” Laplace ascribed universal applicability 
to Newton’s Laws. 

Laplace conjured up a super mathematician, armed with total mastery of all math¬ 
ematical techniques. He argued that such a mathematician could solve the universe : 
Knowing the state of the universe at a given instant—the masses and trajectories of all 
the particles comprising all mechanical systems—and knowing the forces acting on and 
within these systems, this mythical creature could, according to Laplace, determine the 
physical properties of all the systems in the universe at any subsequent time. To infinite 
precision. With certainty. 

Laplace acknowledged the superhuman—nay, supernatural— power of a creature 
who could actually solve the universe by calling his super-mathematician a demon. 
(In contemporary demonology, we might call it an infinite generational computer —the 
CRAY 9000, perhaps.) To his demon, wrote Laplace, “nothing would be uncertain, both 
future and past would be present before its eyes.” Laplace’s point was not that the task 
of solving the universe was viable , but rather that it was possible in principle. In this 
philosophical conviction, Laplace was wrong. 

The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle tells us so. This relationship between the 
inherent indeterminacy in our knowledge of the position and momentum of microscopic 
particles implies that we cannot specify the precise values of these observables at any 
instant. So it’s impossible to predict the precise subsequent behavior of the system. The 
Heisenberg Principle casts an impenetrable fog over the line between cause (the initial 
conditions) and effect (the subsequent evolution) for an individual system and demolishes 
forever the doctrine of Laplacian mechanism. 

Henry Margenau has vividly illustrated the consequences of the demise of mecha¬ 
nistic causality in his book The Nature of Physical Reality (Woodbridge, Conn.: Oxbow 
Press, 1977, p. 420): 


Single events of great magnitude cannot be said to have the picturesque single-event 
causes which classical mechanics envisaged: even though I know the exact state of 
a neutron (having a sharp energy) that is capable of setting off an atomic bomb, and 
know precisely the location of the block of plutonium that is ready to be exploded, 
I cannot predict whether the disaster will occur. The fate of the globe, as a single 
event, may hide itself within atomic uncertainty. 


Sec. 6.10 Final Thoughts: Quantum Causality 227 



Yet, all is not lost. 34 Even in the quantum domain, a limited causality applies. 
After all, the TDSE does establish a causal relationship between the state of a system at 
the initial time—as described mathematically by the initial conditions {^(rc,^): — oo < 
x < oo}—and its state at a later time, ^{x,t) for t > t 0 (assuming that the system is 
allowed to evolve free of measurement). But this is a different kind of causality from 
that of Laplace’s demon. 

The mechanistic causality of Laplace does not follow from quantum physics be¬ 
cause the structure of quantum theory is fundamentally different from that of Newtonian 
mechanics: the latter theory describes individual systems ; the former, ensembles. From 
the initial probability density P(x,t 0 ), we can calculate various probabilistic and statisti¬ 
cal data about position at a later time, such as {x) ( t ) and A x(t). But these data describe 
only the results of a position measurement performed on as ensemble of identical systems 
in the state Quantum physics does not provide a mechanism for predicting the 

specific outcome of a single measurement on a single system. Indeed, such a measure¬ 
ment cannot be described by a theory whose essential elements are interpreted in terms 
of probabilities. 

Of course, Laplacian causality is still a viable philosophical stance from which to 
contemplate the macroscopic world. And perhaps some day, someone will describe the 
physics of a “sub-quantum domain”—a world of sub-microscopic entities over which the 
HUP does not hold dominion. 35 But in the quantum domain—the world of electrons, 
atoms, molecules, and the like—the only cause and effect relationships are those allowed 
by the TDSE. 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 

Alternate Approaches to the Schrodinger Equation 

One of the best ways to familiarize yourself with new concepts is to read about 
them from several viewpoints. The Schrodinger equation is so important that you should 
try to find the time to see how other authors introduce it. I particularly recommend the 
following: 

1. Cropper, William H., The Quantum Physicists and an Introduction to Their Physics (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1970), Chap. 4. (Available in paperback.) Cropper’s approach is 
historical and his style is delightful. 

2. Eisberg, Robert, and Robert Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei, 
and Particles, 2nd ed., (New York: Wiley, 1985), § 5-2. The level of Eisberg and Resnick’s 
eclectic book is lower than this one, and I strongly recommend it as a source of alternative 
introductions to several of the topics we’ll study. 

3. Fong, P., Elementary Quantum Mechanics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1949), 
Chap. 2. 

34 Margenau goes on to reassure us that the odds of encountering a neutron with a sharp energy are 
quite remote and, moreover, that if the energy of the neutron “is only approximately known, ... the prospect 
of its encounter with the plutonium block can usually be predicted with a certainly sufficient for practical 
men.” 

35 David Bohm has elegantly made the case for the existence of a sub-quantum domain in his Causality 
and Chance in Modern Physics (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1957). This book contains a 
marvelous, largely non-technical discussion of the problem of causality. I highly recommend it. 


228 


Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



Differential Equations 

Many of the “math methods” books listed in the Reading Lists for Chaps. 4 and 5 

contain fine introductions to the theory of differential equations. Here are some good 

sources for more complete and specialized treatments: 

4. Hildebrand, Francis B., Advanced Calculus for Applications (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Pren¬ 
tice Hall, 1962), Chaps. 1, 3, and 4 of this wonderful book discuss ordinary differential 
equations; Chaps. 8-10 contain most of what you should know about partial differential 
equations. 

5. Coddington, Earl A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations (Englewood Cliffs, 
N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1961). This book treats only ordinary equations, but it does that well. 

6. Rainville, Earl D., and Phillip E. Bedient, Elementary Differential Equations , 4th ed. (New 
York: Macmillan, 1970). 

A fine introductory book on partial differential equations is 

7. Berg, Paul W., and James L. McGregor, Elementary Partial Differential Equations (San 
Francisco: Holden-Day, 1966). 

Finally, I should mention an invaluable source for the intrepid differential equations 

solver: 

8. Muiphy, George M., Ordinary Differential Equations and Their Solutions (New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1960). This book, which has unconscionably been allowed to go out 
of print, not only contains a splendid summary of methods for solving ordinary differential 
equations, it also includes tables of solutions to hundreds of such equations. If you find it 
in a used book store, grab it! 

On the Philosophy of Quantum Physics 

9. Bohm, David, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics (Philadelphia: University of Penn¬ 
sylvania Press, 1957). 

10. Jammer, Max, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1966). 

11. Margenau, Henry, The Nature of Physical Reality (Woodbridge, Conn.: Oxbow Press, 1977). 

12. Przibram, K., ed., Letters on Wave Mechanics , (New York: Philosophical Library, 1961). 

13. Winter, R. G., Quantum Physics (Belmont, Ca: Wadsworth, 1979). 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


“ ... the main thing, however, is the algorithm!” 
“ ... Any child knows that! 

What’s a beast without an algorithm?” 

—Trurl 

in “The Second Sally” 

from The Cosmic Carnival of Stanislaw Lem 

by Stanislaw Lem 


This chapter’s collection includes the usual practice exercises and straightforward ap¬ 
plications of the material in the chapter you just studied. In addition, I’ve thrown in 
a couple of problems that ask you to work with the stationary-state wave functions for 
the infinite square well, which we’re going to derive in the next chapter, an application 
of the probability current density to a practical (laboratory) situation, and a couple of 


Exercises and Problems 229 



fairly challenging puzzles at the end. The last problem in this set is probably the hardest 
yet—but it’s worth your time. 


Exercises 


6.1 A Possible State Function for an Oscillator 

The potential energy of a one-dimensional simple hannonic oscillator of mass m and natural 

frequency w is V(x) = qX 2 . Here (adapted from Chap. 9) are the normalized wave 
functions that represent the ground state and first excited state of this system: 

>Pi(a:,f) = ( 2 ) ,/ V“* / V».«'» (6.1.1a) 

9i(x,t) = v /2( v ^x)e-'" J/ V iE2 ‘ / ' 1 (6-l.lfo) 


In these expressions, a is a real constant and E n is the real energy of the n th state. Each of 
these functions satisfies the time-dependent Schrodinger equation of the system. 

Now, consider the function 

= 71 

[a] Is Eq. (6.1.2) a valid state function for the system— i.e., does it satisfy the time-dependent 
Schrodinger Equation? Justify your answer either with a derivation or a complete, 
rigorous argument. Is it normalized? Prove your answer. 

[b] Suppose we need to evaluate the energy uncertainty A E(t) = \f {E 2 ) - (E) 2 . Con¬ 
sider the task of evaluating (# 2 )- In Chaps. 5 and 6 we developed two operators 
that can represent the observable energy : the Hamiltonian i~i and the energy operator 
E = ihd/dt. So we should be able to evaluate (-E 2 ) using either 7 i or E, i.e.. 


5$i (x, t) -F 6i^2(x, t) j. 


( 6 . 1 . 2 ) 


<*>-r 

J —00 

/ oo 

* 00 


y*(x, t)7T 2 \I>(a;, t) dx 


^*(a:,t)£; 2 ^(x,t)d3; 


(6.1.3a) 


( 6 . 1 . 36 ) 


Use the time-dependent Schrodinger equation to prove rigorously that these two 
forms are equivalent, i.e., prove that 





t)E 2} ^(x, t ) dx. 


(6.1.4) 


6.2 A Lorentzian State Function 

Consider a free particle of mass m in one dimension. Suppose the momentum probability 
amplitude of the initial state (i.e., the state at t = 0) is 

4>(p) = l»l, (6.2.1) 

where a is a real, positive constant and, of course, |p| is the absolute value of the momentum 
variable p. 

[a] Show that the initial wave function ^(.t, 0) is 


^(x,0) 


nr 2 a 
V 27r a 2 + x 2 


( 6 . 2 . 2 ) 


230 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



Hint: ^(x, 0) is real. Subsequent parts of this problem will be easier if you express it as 
a real function. Here’s a bonus hint: 


\p\ 


~P p < 0 
+p P > 0 


(6.2.3) 


By the way, you can work most of the rest of this exercise even if you can’t do this part. 

[b] What is the parity of \P(x, 0)? What is the ensemble average of position in this state at 
i = 0? Justify your answer. 

[c] Evaluate the mean value of the momentum (at t = 0) for this state. To do so, first write 
down two expressions for this quantity—one in terms of the amplitude function <£(p), 
the other in terms of the initial wave function ^(x,0) and the momentum operator p in 
the position representation. Now, choose one of your expressions and evaluate it. 

Hint: Draw a sketch of $(p). 

[d] In this part we consider the state at t > 0 that evolves from this initial state. Describe 
in words and equations two ways to determine #(x, t) for t > 0. In your discussion, 
include (but do not try to solve) all relevant equations and set up (but do not evaluate) 
all necessary integrals. (You’ll have lots of opportunities to solve equations and evaluate 
integrals in the problems below.) 

[e] Show that the ensemble average of the energy at t = 0 is h 2 /Ama 2 . 

Hint: You can evaluate this quantity either from <I>(p) or 'I'(x, 0), so your first step on this 
part should be to write down expressions for the mean value of the energy in terms of 
each of these functions. Then think carefully about which one will be easier to evaluate 
and use the easier expression. 


Problems 

6.1 Normalization—and Other Like Matters 

In Question 6.6 in § 6.5 you showed that the nonnalization integral for a state function ^(x,f) 
is independent of time, i.e., that once a state function is normalized (e.g., by the procedure in 
§ 3.5) it stays normalized: 

/ OO poc 

ty*(x ) t 0 )<a(x,to)dx = l => / V*(x,t)V(x,t)dx= 1 for all t > to. 

■OC J -oo 

( 6 . 1 . 1 ) 

(If you didn’t answer Question 6.6, please do so now. Then press on.) 

[a] The equation that describes the propagation of a classical wave r(x, t) in one dimension 
has the form 


dx 2 r ( x > *) ~ v 2 u dt 2 r ( x * 0 (6 ' 1 - 2 > 

where u p h is the phase velocity of the wave. This equation is second-order in time. By 
contrast, the time-dependent Schrodinger equation for a free particle, Eq. (6.30), includes 
a first-order time derivative. Now, suppose things had been different: suppose the TDSE 
had the form of the wave equation (6.1.2)— i.e., with a second-order time derivative in it. 
Would the normalization of the solutions of such an equation necessarily be independent 
of time— i.e., would Eq. (6.1.1) hold if the TDSE had the form of Eq. (6.1.2)? Prove 
your answer. 

[b] In applications of quantum mechanics to problems in atomic and molecular physics, one 
frequently must evaluate integrals of the form 

S= ( '&* 1 (x,t)'& 2 (x,t)dx, (6.1.3) 

J — OO 


Exercises and Problems 231 



where ^(x.Q and ip 2 (x,Q represent two physically-realizable quantum states. Such 
integrals are called overlap integrals. (They arise primarily in the calculation of wave 
functions for atoms and molecules.) Evaluating overlap integrals would be an intolerable 
chore if these integrals had to be evaluated at each time. Show that the integral S is 
independent of time— i.e., show that 

= 0. (6.1.4) 

Hint: Use the Principle of Superposition and the answer to Question 6.6. 

6.2 The Principle of Superposition: A Non-Stationary State 

The normalized wave functions and corresponding (well-defined) energies for the ground and 
first-excited states of a particle of mass m whose potential is an infinite square well of length 
L are 

= /f cos(*£) e- ,E ' t/n 

(z,t) = e~' Eat/h 

According to the Principle of Superposition, the linear combination 

^(x'.f) = ci^i(a:,f)+ c 2 ^ 2 (a:,t), (6.2.2) 

where c\ and c 2 are arbitrary complex constants, represents a state of this system. But, 
unlike the energies of the states represented by ^i{x, t) and \l> 2 (x, t), the energy of the 
state represented by ^(x, t) is not well-defined. Moreover, the probability density |'I , (x,i)| 2 
depends on time: this state is non-stationary. 

[a] Actually, the constants c\ and c 2 are not truly arbitrary, because the constraint that ^(x, t) 
must be normalized imposes a limitation on them. Derive the relationship between ci 
and c 2 in Eq. (6.2.2) that must be satisfied if the wave function of the superposition state 
is to be normalized. 

[b] At time t > 0 we perform an ensemble measurement of the total energy of the particle 
whose state is represented by ^(x,f). Derive an expression for the average value we 
would obtain in such a measurement. Express your answer in terms of E\, i? 2 , a, 
and c 2 . 

[c] Prove that E\ < {E) ( t ) < E 2 . Does {E) depend on time? 

[d] In some studies of nuclear physics, a proton in a nucleus can be modeled by a particle 
(with the mass of a proton) in an infinite square well of width L, where L is chosen to be 
a sensible approximation to the size of a nucleus. The “motion” of such a proton is often 
described in terms of a “charge distribution” eP(x, t), where e is the proton charge and 
P(x, t) the quantum-mechanical position probability density, that oscillates at the same 
frequency as P(x,f). Now, suppose the state of the proton is represented by ^(x.f) in 
Eq. (6.2.2) with ci = c 2 . Calculate the frequency (in Hz) of a proton in a nucleus of 
dimension L = lOf. 

6.3 More Explorations of States of the Infinite Square Well 

Here is yet another state of the particle in a box (the infinite square well). The state represented 
by 

»(* ,t) = [cos(7r£)e“ iE,l/ '‘+sin(27ri)e- B2 ' / ”] (6.3.1) 

is a superposition state constructed from the wave functions that represent two of the states 
in the previous problem. In this problem, we’ll use our understanding of operators and the 
Schrodinger equation to further investigate these three states. 


7T 2 k 2 


2 mL 2 

(6.2.1 a) 

Ait 2 h 2 _ 


2mL 2 - 4E ' 

(6.2.1b) 



232 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



[a] In Example 6.1, I proved that ^i (a, t) satisfies the TDSE. Do the same for ^ 2 (x, t) and 
#(*,*)• 

[b] Evaluate the expectation value of momentum (p) (<) for the state represented by '{'(x, t). 
Write your answer as a real function involving E U E 2 ,L, and fundamental constants. 
Briefly discuss the time dependence of your result and contrast it to the time dependence 
of (x) from Pblm. 3.2. 

[c] Evaluate the position and momentum uncertainties for ^(x, t). (If you worked Pblm. 3.2, 
you can get one of these from your answer to it.) Calculate the uncertainty product 
(A x) 2 (t)(Ap) 2 (t) and verify that the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle is satisfied for 
this state. 

[d] Suppose that at some time t > 0 we perform an ensemble measurement of the energy 
of the system in the superposition state represented by ty(x, t). Evaluate the average 
value of the energy that would be obtained in such a measurement. Does your answer 
depend on time? Now evaluate the uncertainty in the energy for this state. Comment 
on the physical implications of the fact that (AE)(£) > 0. 

Hint: You can evaluate the (E) { t ) using either V. or E. In this case, using the latter 
operator will greatly simplify the algebra. 

6.4 Probability Flux in a “Real World” Example 

Protons are widely used in high-energy collision experiments. For example, consider a beam 
of (noninteracting) protons travelling in the +x direction. How might we represent the state 
of the protons in this ensemble? Well, if we are willing to surrender all information about 
the position of the particles in the beam (Ax = oo), we can approximate their state function 
by a pure momentum state of the form (6.135/;). 

In experiments to study the physics of subatomic particles, counters are used that actually 
measure the probability flux j(x,t) as counts per second. Typically, the cross-sectional area 
such a counter presents to a particle beam is 0.2 m 2 . An important step in understanding 
such an experiment is writing down a state function to represent the particles in question. 
For obvious reasons, we prefer to use the pure momentum function model, rather than a 
complicated wave packet, when such a model is justified physically. 

Consider a beam of protons with 2.7 MeV of kinetic energy. Suppose our counter 
measures 4300 counts per second. Write down an explicit expression for a pure momentum 
functiori that models the wave function of a particle in this proton beam. (Explicitly include 
the values of A, ho, and ojq.) 


6.5 


More Properties of the Gaussian Packet 

In § 6.7 we investigated the phenomenon of wave packet spreading and showed that it led to 
considerable changes in the Gaussian wave function as time passes. But, in spite of spreading, 
the wave packet retains one characteristic until its ultimate total dispersion in the t —> oo 
limit. The state function is a Gaussian at all times: once a Gaussian, always a Gaussian. 

[a] Use this peculiarity of the Gaussian wave packet to predict, without resort to graphical 
or algebraic methods, one final property of this free-particle wave function: its peak 
amplitude, the value of \F(x,*) at the center (x) ( t ), decreases with time. Use these two 
facts: 

[1] ^(x,£) remains normalized at all times; 

[2] ^(x, t) spreads, so the region of x that is encompassed by Ax(£) grows. 

Hint: If the area under the probability curve P(x,t ) remains equal to 1 while the width 
of this curve grows, what must happen to the peak value of 'I'(x*,£)? 

[b] Now show that this behavior is a consequence of the multiplicative prefactor in the wave 
function, 

r 11/2 


_ 1 _ 

2 ^ 2 (1 + T&V*) 


by graphing this factor as a function of time. 


Exercises and Problems 233 



6.6 The Probability Current Density for a Wave Packet 

In Example 6.6 I evaluated the one-dimensional probability current density for the simple case 
of a plane wave function. Our result, the constant in Eq. (6.116), was delightfully simple and, 
alas, quite atypical of quantum states. For a more realistic example, consider the Gaussian 
wave packet (6.98) for ko = 0, 


= 


1 

1/4 


.2^ 2 (1-Hd^O 2 . 

exp 

4L * i + J 


( 6 . 6 . 1 ) 


Derive the following expression for the probability current density for this wave packet: 


i(M) = 


h 2 


\/2^L2 4m 2 L 4 


xt £ 


1 + 


h 2 


4m 2 L‘ l 


-3/2 


exp 


2L2 i + d^ 2 


. ( 6 . 6 . 2 ) 


Hint: You’ll find it useful to define two intermediate quantities that are independent of x: 


1/4 


[2^(1+ i^() J 


(6.6.3a) 


. = J_(i zilmE!! 
" ^ i + 


(6.6.3 6) 


Write the wave packet and its complex conjugate in terms of a and b and evaluate the partial 
derivatives you need to determine j. One more thing: remember that the complex number 6 
can be written as 6 = Re b + i Im b. 

6.7 A Martian Wave Packet 

In this chapter, we considered the evolution of a free particle wave packet: i.e., its propagation 
and spreading with time. Let’s see what happens when we try to apply these ideas to a (rather 
large) macroscopic particle. 

Consider the planet Mars as a particle, the motion of which is to be described by a 
quantum mechanical wave packet. Suppose that at t = 0 (the birth of the universe) the width 
of the packet was 0.01 m—a ridiculously small number on an astrophysical scale. Now, 
neglecting the gravitational field of the sun, calculate the increase in the width of this packet 
from its birth (about 5 billion years ago) to the present. 

6.8 A Probability Amplitude for Particle Propagation 

The TDSE is the partial differential equation that must be satisfied by all wave functions 
of whatever system we’re studying. To obtain a particular wave function, we solve this 
equation subject to the initial conditions {^(x.to): — oo <x< oo} appropriate to whatever 
state we’re interested in. We can make clearer this vital dependence of the wave function at 
any time t > t 0 on the function ^(x y to) by looking at the TDSE from a different point of 
view. In this problem, we’ll show that } $’(x y t) is related to its initial condition by 

/ OO 

I<(x, t\ x\ t 0 ) dx . (6.8.1) 

■oo 

The critter K(x, t\ x\ to) in this expression is called the propagator. 30 
[a] We’ve already developed the machinery to derive Eq. (6.8.1). In our study of wave 
packets (in Chap. 4) we discovered that such a wave function can be written as an 
integral over pure momentum functions 


30 Actually, K(x,t;x > , to) is called the retarded propagator because it is zero for t < to- 


234 Chap. 6 A Quantum Equation Of Motion 



( 6 . 8 . 2 «) 


i.e., as a wave packet 


v 27 rh 


/ oo 

t) rfp. 

•oo 


( 6 . 8 . 2 /;) 


The function $(p) is the momentum probability amplitude. We calculate this amplitude, 
in turn, from the initial wave function $(; x, f ( >) using the Fourier transform relationship 
(here written for to = 0) 


*(p) = -f= [ 

v2irh 


Now, by substituting this expression for <F(p) into Eq. (6.8.2/;), demonstrate that ^(x, /) 
can be written as an integral over the initial function, as in Eq. (6.8.1). Also, develop 
the following integral expression for the propagator I<(x, t\x',t 0 ) in Eq. (6.8.1). [Write 
your propagator as an integral over p including E{p) in the time-dependent factor. For 
convenience, let to =0.] 


K(x, t\x, 0) = 


exp -i{x - x)j? - i^j^-t dp. 
n n 


[b] Now consider the free particle, for which you know the dispersion relation E(p). Eval¬ 
uate the integral in your propagator and thereby obtain the following analytic expression 
for the free-particle propagator: 

K(x,t\x\ 0) = ex P m 1 [for a free particle] (6.8.5) 


[c] Following Max Born’s ideas, we interpret the wave function #(a;',fo) as a probability 
amplitude for finding the particle in an infinitesimal region dx' about x' in a position 
measurement performed at t 0 . Similarly, we interpret ty(z,£) as the position probability 
amplitude for the time t > to. These statements, in turn, suggest an interpretation for 
K(x,t]x\t o). Discuss the interpretation of the propagator as a probability amplitude 
and the physical significance of Eq. (6.8.1). 

[d] One of the (many) important properties of the propagator is its simple “initial value”— 
i.e., at t — to. Prove that 

A'(x,0;x / ,0) = 6(x -x), (6.8.6) 

where 6(x' - x) is the Dirac Delta function (see § 4.2). How would you interpret this 
result physically? 

[e] The propagator also satisfies a differential equation that looks suspiciously like the TDSE: 

-H(£,p)J K{x,t\x , to) = ih6(x - x')6(t - to), (6.8.7) 

where id is the Hamiltonian of the system. For the free particle, of course, it = T. 
Verify that your free particle propagator (from part [b]) satisfies Eq. (6.8.7). Any function 
that satisfies a differential equation of this form— i.e., with a Dirac Delta function on 
the right-hand side—is called a Green’s function; so you have just proven that the 
free-particle propagator is just a particular kind of Green’s function. 

Remark: To keep the algebra in this problem as simple as possible, I’ve asked you to consider 
only the propagator for a free particle. But Eqs. (6.8.1), (6.8.6), and (6.8.7) also hold for a 
particle with a non-zero potential. If the particle is not free, it is sometimes easier to obtain 
the propagator by solving Eq. (6.8.7), subject to the (reasonable) boundary conditions: 

I<{x,t\x,U)) = 0 for t < to. (6.8.8) 


Exercises and Problems 235 



CHAPTER 7 


Simplifying Matters 

The Time-Independent Schrodinger 
Equation 


7.1 

7.2 

7.3 

7.4 

7.5 
* 7.6 

7.7 


In Search of Separable Wave Functions 

Time and Energy 

A Profile of the TISE 

Particle in an Escape-Proof Box 

A Closer Look at Stationarity 

Superpositions of Stationary States 

Final Thoughts: Do Stationary States Really Exist? 



No, there are still difficulties, 
but the outline of the plot is clear 
and will develop itself more clearly 
as we proceed. 

—M. Rozer to Lord Peter Wimsey 
in The Nine Tailors 
by Dorothy L. Sayers 


In 1926 Erwin Schrodinger published four papers that laid the foundation for the wave 
theory of quantum mechanics. The time-dependent Schrodinger Equation (Chap. 6) was 
the subject of the second of these papers. In the first, Schrodinger introduced a simpler 
time-independent equation, which is usually derived from the TDSE. 

The reason for this apparent inversion of natural order lies in Schrodinger’s back¬ 
ground. From research early in his career on the physics of continuous media, Schrodinger 
knew well the mathematical properties of the special class of equations called eigenvalue 
equations . The time-independent Schrodinger Equation (TISE) belongs to this class, so 
Schrodinger was primed to discover it first. 

In this book, we are following the logic of mathematics, not history, so we began 
with Schrodinger’s time-dependent equation, as codified in Postulate IV. From the TDSE, 
it’s but a short hop to the time-independent Schrodinger equation. The solutions of the 
latter are functions of position but not of time; they describe the spatial dependence of 
an important class of quantum states called stationary states. These states play a vital 
role in quantum physics, even though they are rarely found in nature. 

For any microscopic system, however complicated, the essential problem of quan¬ 
tum theory is the same: Given the system Hamiltonian H—the operator that mathemati¬ 
cally represents the system—solve the TDSE for state functions that fit prescribed initial 
conditions. These conditions are usually established by experimental circumstances at 
the initial time. In many cases, the initial state is non-stationary. But non-stationary 
states are too complicated mathematically to be obtained directly from the TDSE. Sta¬ 
tionary states provide a way out of this predicament, for they are the building blocks of 
non-stationary wave functions (Chap. 12). 

In prior examples and problems, I’ve shown you wave functions for a few station¬ 
ary states. All stationary-state wave functions have a common, simple mathematical 
form: 


^(x,t) = (function of x) (function of t). stationary state (7.1) 

The time-independent Schrodinger Equation determines the function of x in a stationary- 
state wave function. 

Not all microscopic systems have stationary states—but most do. In § 7.1, we’ll 
deduce the conditions under which these states exist and will derive equations for the 
functions of x and t that comprise their wave functions. Then in § 7.2, we’ll solve 
the time equation and, in the process, discover one of the characteristics of a stationary 
state: its energy is sharp. We can dig this and other properties out of the mathematical 
character of the TISE, which we’ll probe in § 7.3 and 7.5. 

In Part III, we’ll solve the TISE for several important one-dimensional systems 
and in Volume II will tackle systems in three dimensions and many-particle systems. As 
the number of dimensions and particles increases, the mathematical contortions we must 
perform to solve this equation become more complicated. But, happily, I can show you 


237 



the basic steps in its solution in the context of a very simple example: the particle in a 
box. We shall solve this problem (at last) in § 7.4. 

As you plow through this example, and others in chapters to come, be careful 
to not lose sight of the special nature of stationary states. In general, quantum states 
are non-stationary. The beautiful and powerful connection between stationary and non¬ 
stationary states is so important that it gets its own chapter (Chap. 12)—but I’ll provide 
a sneak preview in § 7.6. 


7.1 IN SEARCH OF SEPARABLE WAVE FUNCTIONS 


It is easy to see why solving the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation for an arbitrary 
system is so hard. Even for a single particle in one dimension, this equation is rather 
formidable: 

t 2 q2 q 

+ = ih—y(x,t). (7.2) 

The underlying problem is not just that it’s a partial differential equation of second-order 
in x and first-order in £, but that we must contend with both of these variables at once. 
We cannot solve for the x dependence of the state function without taking account of its 
t dependence, because in general x and t are inextricably linked in the potential energy 
function V{x, £). 

As a consequence, the space and time dependence of a wave function may be 
very complicated. We have seen one example of this complexity in § 6.6: the Gaussian 
free-particle state function (6.98) is an involved mixture of x- and £-dependent factors: 




2nL 2 [ 1 + i 


h 


2 mL 2 


i -i/4 


Xe i(k 0 x-uj 0 t) exp 


* (*-*)’ 
4i2 (l + ixHpt) 


(7.3) 


Only the comparative simplicity of the free-particle TDSE lets us solve this equation 
analytically. 


Strategy: Separation of Variables 


One way to subdue recalcitrant multi-variable differential equations is to seek solutions 
that have a particularly simple form. We know that wave functions must be complex 
functions of x and £; and we might guess that the simplest such solutions are of the 
product form (7.1): 

^(a;, t) = ip(x)£(t). [stationary state] (7.4) 

I have let the lower-case Greek letter psi (-0) represent the x dependence of \1> (#,£), 
and zeta (Q its t dependence. Mathematicians call such product functions separable 
solutions of the partial differential equation (7.2); we quantum mechanics call them 
stationary-state wave functions. 


238 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



The idea of basing quantum theory on stationary states sounds good, but it raises 
several questions. Do separable wave functions exist for all physical systems? If not, 
for what kinds of systems do they exist? For such systems, how can we get our hands 
on the “pieces” ^(x) and £(£)? And for these systems, how are the stationary-state wave 
functions related to the more general non-stationary wave functions? These are the focal 
questions of this chapter. 

The separable form (7.4) implies that we can solve for ^(x) and £(£) separately. 
To do so, we must derive from the TDSE an equation for ip(x) that does not depend 
on t and a separate equation for £(£) that does not depend on x. This is the goal of 
the mathematical method called separation of variables, to reduce a partial differential 
equation in several variables to separate, simpler equations. We have no guarantee that 
this method will succeed for the TDSE, but it’s worth a try. 

To apply this strategy, let’s substitute the separated form (7.4) into Eq. (7.2) and 
try to isolate on one side of the resulting equation all terms that depend on x and on the 
other, all terms that depend on t. That is, we are going to try to reduce the TDSE to an 
equality between two single-variable algebraic expressions : 

d d 2 d d 2 

,erms in *• 55- o*' ■■■ = terms ,n *- at-■ w . (7 5) 

If such an arrangement is possible, then the expressions on the left and right sides of 
(7.5) must each equal a constant and this equation will separate (aha!) into two ordinary 
differential equations, one in x , the other in t. 

Separation of Space and Time in the TDSE 

Optimistically assuming that a solution of the form (7.4) exists, we write the TDSE (7.2) 
as 

2^(®)^(*) + ^(*,0#*) CM = ^ • ( 7 - 6 ) 

We can simplify (7.6) by exploiting the ^-independence of ^(x) and the .T-independence 
of £(£) to transform the partial derivatives into ordinary derivatives, viz., 

CM +V{x > t)'ip(x)((t) = i/j(x) . (7.7) 

To begin arranging (7.7) in the form (7.5), let’s divide both sides by the product 
^(x,£) = ^(x)C (t): 1 

W) +K(a:,<) = [ ih Tt m 

Equation (7.8) is almost separable; but in quantum mechanics, almost isn’t good enough. 
In general, the potential energy can depend on x and t, and, if it does, our grand strategy 
fails, for we cannot further separate Eq. (7.8). 

1 You may be worried that t/»(x) might be zero for some value of x; at such an x, the factor l/rp(x) 
is infinite and Eq. (7.8) ceases to make sense. Don’t fret. Division by ip(x) is an intermediate step in this 
derivation, designed to clarify the logic of separation of variables. We shall soon restore x/>(x) to its rightful 
position—see Eq. (7.10a). 


(7.8) 


Sec. 7.1 In Search of Separable Wave Functions 239 



Okay; let’s scale down our ambitions: Rather than try to find separable state 
functions for any quantum system, let’s consider a system whose potential energy depends 
only on position variables. If V in the TDSE depends only on x, then Eq. (7.8) has the 
magic form (7.5), i.e.. 


1 

h 2 d 2 

, . l 

r d l 

il){x) 





Comes now the crucial step. Think about Eq. (7.9): how could the left hand side— 
an expression in x that is independent of t —equal the right-hand side—an expression in 
t that is independent of xl Answer: only if both sides are independent of x and t. We 
can therefore equate each side of (7.9) to a constant—say, a. Doing so, and rearranging 
terms slightly, we obtain two separate equations: 



ft 



~2 md^^ X ' + V ' X ^ X ) = 

(7.10a) 

and 




ih Tt ^ = a 

(7.10ft) 


For obvious reasons, mathematicians call a the separation constant. 

Great. Equations (7.10) are ordinary differential equations—(7.10a) is second- 
order in x, (7.10ft) is first-order in t —and as such are much easier to solve than the 
TDSE. These two single-variable equations are equivalent to the TDSE for a product 
wave function ^(x,t) = ip(x)((t), i.e., for a stationary state. The fact that we can 
obtain such equations at all, provided V does not depend on t, proves that stationary- 
state wave functions exist for systems with a time-independent potential energy. 

We’ll spend the rest of this chapter poking and prodding at Eqs. (7.10). But a 
couple of important features leap out at us immediately. First, although we can solve 
these x and t equations separately, they are not completely independent of one another: 
they are linked by the separation constant a. Second, the x equation (7.10a) contains 
the system Hamiltonian; indeed, we can write this equation as H^x) = aip(x). [Since 
H is an operator that represents the total energy (Chap. 5), you may suspect that a is 
the value of this observable in the stationary state. You would be right—see § 7.2]. 

The spatial function ^(x) therefore depends explicitly on the system we are studying— 
i.e., on details of its potential energy. But the time equation (7.10ft) does not contain 
H: by solving this equation, we find, once and for all, the time dependence of any 
stationary-state wave function for any system! Equation (7.10ft) is refreshingly simple, 
and you can probably guess the solution (see § 7.2). The x equation (7.10a) is a bit 
more formidable; it is the subject of much of the rest of this book. 

Conservative Systems 

The derivation of Eqs. (7.10) shows that the nature of the potential energy determines 
whether or not stationary states exist: 


V independent of t 


stationary states exist 


240 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 




A system whose potential energy is time-independent is said to be conservative . 2 So 
the vital point to remember is 


Rule 

Stationary states exist only for conservative systems. 


To study a non-conservative system (which is not, incidentally, called a “liberal system”) 
we must deal with the TDSE directly, a challenge we’ll take up in Volume II. 

The microscopic universe is full of conservative systems. Isolated atoms, molecules, 
and solids are conservative, as are many collision complexes formed by scattering a mi¬ 
croscopic particle—an electron, say—from one of these targets. The class of conservative 
systems does, however, exclude some important problems, e.g., those in which a time- 
dependent external field is present. (Lasers fall into this category.) For example, in 
Volume II we’ll probe the quantum states of a microscopic particle of charge q exposed 
to a time-varying external electric field of magnitude E and frequency u). We’ll find that 
the Hamiltonian of the particle in such a field is 


n = - 


d 2 

2m dx 2 


qEx cosuit. 


(7.11) 


The time dependence of the potential energy -qEx cosuit renders the TDSE for this 
problem inseparable, so stationary states for a particle in a time-varying electromagnetic 
field do not exist. 3 

You may recall from classical physics an important conservation law for a conser¬ 
vative macroscopic system: if the forces on the system are conservative, then its energy 
is conserved, i.e., energy is a constant of the motion. In the next section we shall discover 
the form this law takes for microscopic systems. 


7.2 TIME AND ENERGY 

In § 7.1, I noted that the time equation (7.10ft) is independent of the system’s potential 
energy. This simple, first-order ordinary differential equation is easy to solve, and its 
solution has some surprising physical consequences. 

The Time Factor for a Stationary-State Wave Function 

To solve Eq. (7.10ft), I’ll invoke a standard trick from the theory of ordinary differ¬ 
ential equations—one you’ll find in the books in § II of the Suggested Readings for 

2 This nomenclature is taken from classical physics, where a system is conservative if the forces on it 
are such that the work done around a closed orbit is zero. Any conservative force is derivable from a potential 
energy that is independent of time—hence the connection between the classical and quantum definitions of a 
conservative system. If the forces acting on a classical particle are conservative, then the energy of the particle 
is conserved. For more on conservative systems, see § I-l of Classical Mechanics, 2nd ed. by Herbert 
Goldstein, (Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1980). 

3 Do not conclude from this example that the mathematical technique separation of variables necessarily 
fails if the potential energy depends on lime. If, for example, V(x, t) happens to be the sum of two terms, one 
of which depends only on x , the other of which depends only on t, then we can determine separable solutions 
to the Schrodinger Equation. 


Sec. 7.2 Time and Energy 241 




Chap. 6. This trick is based on the logarithmic derivative of a function. By definition, 
the logarithmic derivative of a function ((f) is 


logarithmic derivative of ((f) 


= W)l< (t) - (7 - 12) 


We can write Eq. (7A0b) in terms of the logarithmic derivative of ((f) by simply 
moving ((f) to the left-hand side, viz., 

W)Tt m = "f • < 713) 

If we use the definition (7.12) and then integrate the result from 0 to f, we have 


--¥i> 


’Tis now an easy matter to evaluate both sides of (7.14); to wit 

lnC( t )-lnC(0) = lng| = -|t. 

To obtain the time function, we just exponentiate both sides of (7.15) viz., 

((f) = ((0)e- iQt /'\ 


(7.14) 


(7.15) 


(7.16) 


Question 7-1 

Verify by direct substitution that the function in (7.16) solves the time equation (7.10 b). 


The factor ((0) in (7.16) is just the initial condition for the differential equation 
(7.10/;). It is convenient to pick ((0) = 1, so that the general form of a stationary-state 
wave function is 4 

^(tc,f) = i]){x)e~ iat l h . [stationary state] (7.17) 

We’ve accomplished a great deal with very little work: we have found the functional 
form of the time factor for any stationary state of any system. Isn’t that terrific?! Yes, 
except for one little thing: what is the meaning of a? 

Question 7-2 

You can anticipate the answer to this question by applying a problem-solving gambit called 
dimensional analysis: The exponent in ((f) must be dimensionless, so what must be the 
dimension of «? Now, what observable do you think a stands for? 


Identifying the Separation Constant 

The Born inteipretation of \P(a;,f) provides a clue to the physical significance of the 
separation constant a. According to Postulate II, this function is the amplitude of a 
probability wave. And now, in Eq. (7.17), we’ve discovered that for a stationary state, 
this wave oscillates at frequency afk. 

‘This choice entails no loss of generality. The physically relevant initial condition is the one on ty(x, <), 
i.e., the function ^(x’,0). The choice C(0) = 1 allows us to specify this initial condition in terms of the 
spatial function, i.e., \P(x, 0) = ip(x). 


242 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



But wait a minute. From the de Broglie-Einstein relation E = Ttw, we already 
know the “oscillation frequency of a particle”: if E is the particle’s energy, then this 
frequency is E/h. To make our time function (7.17) consistent with this fundamental 


relation, we interpret a as the total energy of the particle in the state represented by this 
function. With this identification, the general form of a stationary state wave function 
becomes 

r 

[stationary state] (7.18) 


At this point, we know only the time dependence of ^(a:, t). We determine the (al¬ 
lowed) values of the energy and the spatial dependence of ^(a;, t) by solving Eq. (7.10a). 
Replacing a by E, we can write this equation as 5 


9(x,t) = ip(x)e- IE, ' r ‘ 


fi? d 2 
2 m d x 2 


^e(x) + V{x)\})e(x) = EtPe(x) 


USE 


(7.19) 


This is the time-independent Schrodinger Equation. Since the energy E appears 
explicitly in this equation, its solutions will depend on the value of this parameter. 
That’s why I labeled the spatial function with E. 

We have discovered that the energy of a stationary state is well-defined (sharp). 
Indeed, we can simply read the value of E off a stationary-state function of the form 
(7.18), such as Eq. (6.23) for the ground state of the infinite square well. In § 7.5, 
we’ll build a rigorous foundation under this observation by proving that A E = 0 for a 
stationary state. 

The essential result of this chapter (so far) is: if a microscopic system is conser¬ 
vative, then there exist special quantum states of the system, called stationary states, in 
which the energy is sharp. This important result is the quantum mechanical counterpart of 
the classical law mentioned at the end of § 7.1: the energy of a conservative macroscopic 
system is a constant of the motion. 6 

Buoyed by our success with the time equation, we’re ready to tackle the spatial 
equation, the time-independent Schrodinger Equation. 


7.3 A PROFILE OF THE TISE 


“So did I,” said Pooh, wondering 
what a Heffalump was like. 

—Winnie the Pooh 
by A. A. Milne 


The TISE for iJje(x) in a stationary state of energy E , Eq. (7.19), can be written in 
terms of the Hamiltonian ii as 

■’Only for bound states does the TISE determine the allowed energies. As we’ll see in Chap. 8, for 
convenience, we admit to quantum mechanical problem-solving continuum stationary states. These functions 
are not rigorously admissible, but they are valuable models for the study of collisions of microscopic particles. 
The energy of a continuum state need not be determined by solution of the TISE. 

G In quantum mechanics an observable Q is said to be a constant of the motion if its expectation value 
does not change with time for any state (see Chap. II). 


Sec. 7.3 A Profile of the TISE 243 





= Eip E (x) 


TISE 


(7.20) 


[Be careful not to use £ instead of E in (7.20). What a difference a little hat makes!] 
Because H = T + V, the explicit form—and hence the solutions—of this differential 
equation depend on the potential energy V(x). 

For example, the potential of a particle of mass m in a uniform, one-dimensional 
gravitational field with gravitational constant g is mgx , so the TISE for a particle in such 
a gravitational well is 


h 2 _d?_ 

2m d x 2 


4- mgx 


ijj E (x) = E^ e {x). 


(7.21) 


Another important example is the simple harmonic oscillator: if tu 0 denotes the natural 
frequency of the oscillator, then the potential energy of the oscillator is mw\x 2 f2. The 
TISE for this system is therefore 


h 2 d 2 1 2 2 


E {x) = Eip E (x). 


(7.22) 


To lay a foundation for our study in Part III of these and other systems, we’ll 
here scrutinize the general TISE, much as we did the TDSE in § 6.3. We’ll put on 
our mathematician’s hat for awhile and try to deduce general mathematical properties 
of Eq. (7.20). In particular, we’re going to investigate the mathematical structure of 
this equation, the normalization condition for its solutions, limitations on normalizable 
solutions and the implications of these limitations for the energy of the stationary state, 
and, finally, a new mathematical property called degeneracy. 


The TISE Considered as an Eigenvalue Equation 


For a single particle in one dimension, the TISE is a second-order, ordinary differential 
equation in the variable x. It’s linear and homogeneous and has two distinct (i.e., linearly 
independent) solutions. 7 Because it is of second order, the TISE requires two boundary 
conditions. These are just the boundary conditions on the state function ty(x,t) that 
we discussed in § 6.3; for a stationary state, they show up as conditions on the spatial 
function ip E (x). For example, the spatial function for a state in which the particle is 
bound by a potential well must satisfy the conditions 

ijj E (x) -> 0. (7.23) 

|.t|—» oo 

The TISE is a differential equation of a very special type; it contains a parameter — 
the energy E —that appears in a specific way. Look at the structure of (7.20): a differen¬ 
tial operator (H) operates on the unknown function [ip E (x)] to produce, not a different 
function of x, but rather the same function, ip E (x), times the parameter E. Mathe¬ 
maticians call an equation of this form an eigenvalue equation and say ) E (x ) is the 

7 A reminder: Two functions fi(x) and fe(x) are said to be linearly independent if the equation 
ci /i(.x) + C 2 f2(x) = 0 is satisfied only by ci = C 2 = 0. That is, two functions that are proportional to one 
another are linearly dependent. A common instance of linearly dependent functions in the quantum mechanics 
of conservative systems is two spatial functions xj> i(x) and 4*2 {$) that differ only by a a global phase factor 
e'*. These functions are not distinct, and physically they represent the same quantum state. (Remember from 
Chap. 3 that state functions are indetemiinate to within such a factor.) 


244 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 




eigenfunction of the differential operator H, and E is the corresponding eigenvalue.” 
Thus, when feeling mathematically inclined, I may refer to the spatial function ipE (x) 
as the Hamiltonian eigenfunction. 

The TISE is by no means the only important eigenvalue equation in quantum 
mechanics, and in Chap. 11 we shall consider such equations in their own right. For 
now, though, let’s stay with the TISE. 

Aside: The TISE in 3D. The form of the TISE for a single particle in three 
dimensions—or, for that matter, for a many-particle three-dimensional system—is 
identical to (7.20). Such equations differ, of course, in the number of independent 
variables. For example, the TISE for a single particle in a three-dimensional isotropic 
harmonic oscillator potential V(r) = mulr 2 /2 is 


We(r) = 


fr 2 .1 2 2 

- —V +-mu , 0 r 


*I>e{ r) = EiPe( r), 


(7.24) 


where the Laplacian V 2 is given in Eq. (6.17). Notice that, unlike the one-dimensional 
TISE (7.20), Eq. (7.24) is a partial differential equation. 


Normalization of the Spatial Function 

For a function —stationary or otherwise—to be valid, it must, of course, satisfy 

the TDSE of the system. But this function must also satisfy the additional demands of 
§ 3.5: it must be single-valued, continuous, and smoothly varying. And, finally, it must 
be normalizable. That is, it must be possible to scale the function so that its normalization 
integral equals one: 


f **(x } t)V(x } t)dx = 1. (7.25) 

J-DO 

If the state is stationary, then each of these conditions on ^{x,t) translates into a 
condition on the Hamiltonian eigenfunction iPe{x). The resulting normalization condition 
is particularly simple, because the time factor in a stationary state wave function is the 
exponential function e~ lEt f h . The integrand in the normalization integral (7.25) is 
^*(x,t)^f(x i t). The required complex conjugate is 

= 0s(*)e +iK/ *. (7.26) 


so the product t)^!(x,t) becomes iI>* e (x)i/)e(x)' Hence the normalization condition 
on the wave function reduces to a similar condition on the Hamiltonian eigenfunction, 8 

/ i>' E (x)4> E (x)dx = 1. (7.27) 

We can therefore normalize spatial functions using the same procedure we applied to 
the time-dependent wave functions in § 3.5. Notice that the requirement (7.27) rules out 
“exponentially exploding” spatial functions, such as those in Fig. 7.1a. 


8 We need the complex conjugate of 0 e(.t) in (7.27) only if this function is complex. A real, single¬ 
variable ordinary differential equation has real solutions. Moreover, a solution that satisfies boundary conditions 
such as (7.25) is unique to within the usual global phase factor. Thus, when studying bound states of a one¬ 
dimensional system, we’re always at liberty to use real spatial functions. Such solutions arc desirable, because 
they are easier to work with than complex solutions. Note that even if 0 e(.t) is real, the wave function is 
complex, because the spatial function must be multiplied by the complex time factor. 


Sec. 7.3 A Profile of the TISE 245 



(0 

Figure 7.1 Examples of (a) inadmissible, (b) admissible, and (c) inadmissible-but- 
useful spatial functions. Neither of the functions in (a) can be normalized, because they 
blow up as |.x| —» oo. The oscillatory function in (c) does not properly go to zero in 
this limit, but we admit it to quantum theory as a useful model (see Chap. 8). 


The disappearance of the time factor in the product ty*(x,t)'&(x ) t) is a common 
incident in quantum mechanics. Most important quantities involve products containing 
the wave function and its complex conjugate. If such a product is present—and if the 
wave function represents a stationary state—then this cancellation will eliminate the time 
dependence (see §7.5) 

Existence of Normalizable Spatial Functions 

You may be wondering, “If I am given a value of E , can I be assured that a normalizable 
solution of the TISE for that energy exists?” 


246 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 


In general, no. To be sure, Eq. (7.20) can be solved for any value of E —using a 
host of mathematical and numerical methods (see Part III)—but normalizable solutions 
of this equation can be found only for certain values of E. Even if the number of 
normalizable solutions is infinite, their energies form a discrete list. That is, between 
any two valid energies Ej- i and Ej, there are an infinite number of “invalid energies,” 
invalid because for values of E in the interval Ej- 1 < E < Ej the solution blows 

up as |x| —> oo. Several such offenders appear in Fig. 7.1a. 

Thus the requirement that the spatial functions be normalizable leads inexorably to 
quantization of energy. Only for special “allowed” energies do physically admissible 
stationary state functions, with spatial functions that satisfy the TISE and boundary 
conditions such as (7.23), exist. One of the most powerful corroborations of quantum 
theory is the fact that these energies and only these energies are ever found in energy 
measurements on microscopic systems. In § 7.4, we’ll work an example that illustrates 
how boundary conditions lead to energy quantization. 

Uniqueness and Degeneracy 

Suppose we have found an energy E for which a normalizable solution to the TISE 

exists. Might there be other, distinct solutions for this energy, or is this solution unique? 
The answer depends on the nature of the system we are studying. A solution of any 
second-order, single-variable differential equation that satisfies two boundary conditions 
is unique . 9 There follows from this mathematical fact a uniqueness condition: 


Rule 

Bound-state solutions to the TISE of a one-dimensional single-particle system are unique. 


This rule establishes a one-to-one correspondence between the quantized energies 
of a one-dimensional single-particle quantum system and its bound stationary state wave 
functions: 

valid quantized energy E unique ^{x,t) = if E (x)e~ lEt 

(7.28) 

[bound state in one dimension] 

We describe this property by saying that a bound state energy E is non-degenerate. 

The simple correspondence (7.28) does not necessarily apply to more complicated 
quantum systems. For example, in studying a microscopic particle in three dimensions, 
we’ll find stationary-state energies to which there correspond more than one distinct 
spatial function. Such energies are said to be degenerate. In the jargon of quantum 
physics, a stationary state energy that has n distinct spatial functions is said to be n-fold 
degenerate. 

Example 7.1. Stationary States of a Free Particle 

In Chaps. 4-6 we exhaustively investigated a function of separable form, the pure momentum 
function 10 

9 See, for example, An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations by Earl A. Coddington (Engle¬ 
wood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1961.) 

10 Here, as in § 6.8, I’ll leave A arbitrary. If we want to ensure Dirac Delta function normalization, as 
in Chap. 4, we can always choose A = 1/\/2tt/j . 


Sec. 7.3 A Profile of the TISE 247 




V 


^ P (x,t) = Ae ipx,h e iEt,h . (7.29) 

The corresponding energies are given by the free particle dispersion relation tu(A;) = 
hk 2 /(2m) as 


2 1,2 


E = 


h*k 

2m 


[for a free particle] 


The spatial dependence of the pure momentum function (7.29) is 
4>e{x) = Ae ipx/h . 


(7.30) 


(7.31) 


This function satisfies the time-independent Schrddinger equation for a free particle, 


h 2 d 2 , , . , 


[for a free particle] 


(7.32) 


if E is given by (7.30). But the spatial function (7.31) has several peculiar features, the 
most obvious of which is that it does not obey the boundary conditions (7.23). 

Question 7-3 

By substituting the function iPe{x) in Eq. (7.31) into Eq. (7.32), derive Eq. (7.30) 
for the corresponding energies. 


This failure comes about because, rather than decay to zero, the function e ipx ^ h 
oscillates between +1 and —1 as |x| —» oo. Consequently the spatial function (7.31) is not 
normalizable, /.<?., we cannot scale it to obtain a function that satisfies the condition (7.27). 
This property of the pure momentum function means that it’s not physically admissible— 
although it’s nonetheless useful as a model of a fat wave packet. 

Two properties of the energies (7.30) follow from the impossibility of normalizing 
these functions. First, the energies are not quantized ; all values E > 0 are allowed. [Re¬ 
member: quantization follows from boundary conditions like (7.23), which the free-particle 
spatial functions do not obey.] Second, these energies are degenerate. In fact, for any value 
of E > 0, we can easily find two distinct solutions of (7.32). One of these solutions is 
(7.31); its a: dependence is e' px,h . And there is a second solution that is proportional to 

e ~ ipx /h 

It’s easy to see from the free-particle energies (7.30) why there are two distinct 
spatial functions for each energy. These functions depend on the energy through their 
dependence o n p. B ut two values of p correspond to each value of E, i.e., p = +y/2mE 
and p = — \/2mE. So each energy E > 0 is two-fold degenerate. 

Because of this degeneracy, the notation in (7.31) is inadequate: it does not tell us 
which linearly independent solution for energy E we are talking about. We can, however, 
fully specify a particular spatial function by appending a superscript (+) or (-) to -0 e(z): 

t/4 +) (z) = Ae ipx,h (7.33a) 

^e\ x ) = Be~ ipx/h . (7.33/;) 

The state functions ip { ' E \x)e~ ,Et/h and (x)e~' Et/h represent an ensemble of free 
particles of energy E moving in the +x (p = \j2mE) or -x (p = -\/2mE) direction, 
respectively. 

An interesting consequence of the existence of two linearly-independent spatial func¬ 
tions for a single value of E is that we can easily construct other solutions to the TISE for 
this energy, such as 


e(x) = A^\x) + Brp { E \x) t 


(7.34) 


248 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



where A and B are complex constants. In fact, since A and B are arbitrary, we can construct 
in this way an infinite number of additional solutions. 

This flexibility is often useful in problem solving. For example, we can pick A and 
B in (7.34) so that this linear combination is real, e.g., 

A = B = j =S> ^\ x ) = Ceos (7.35a) 

A = ~ B = Yi ==> tPe\ x ) = Csin . (7.356) 

[The (+) and (-) superscripts of (7.33) are not appropriate to the new spatial functions 
of (7.35), so I have labelled these functions by (e) and (o) to indicate their parity (even 
or odd). I’ll explain this apparently quixotic choice of notation in § 7.4.] These choices 
provide real, rather than complex, spatial functions. 


Note carefully that the flexibility afforded us by degeneracy is not a general property 
of the stationary states of a single particle in one dimension. For example, to any valid 
bound state energy, there is but one spatial function. In the next section, we’ll study an 
example of just such a situation. 


7.4 A PARTICLE IN AN ESCAPE-PROOF BOX 


Most of the important properties of stationary states and the steps we carry out to obtain 
their wave functions appear in the solution of a very simple problem: the particle in a 
box. The potential energy of such a particle, which is shown in Fig. 7.2, is 

( oo —oo < x < —|L 

0 ~\L<x<+\L . (7.36) 

oo +\L < x < oo 

Because this potential is infinite at the walls of the box, all state functions must obey the 
boundary conditions (§ 6.3) 


= -\L, t) = 0 (7.37a) 

*{x = +\L, t) = 0. (7.37 b) 


And, since V = 0 inside the box—the only region in which the wave functions are 
non-zero—the Hamiltonian there is just the kinetic energy operator, 


H = T 


ft 2 d 2 
2 mdx 2 


--L < x < 

2 “ “ 2 


(7.38) 


So in this region, the TISE is 






(7.39) 


In this section, we’ll solve this equation and explore key properties of the resulting 
stationary states. 

In earlier examples, we investigated the wave function for the ground state of this 
system: the stationary state with the minimum total energy. The value of this energy 
(which we’ll derive in this section) is 


Sec. 7.4 A Particle in an Escape-Proof Box 249 



r 


+00 


X =0 


+oo 


+ 1 2 L 


Center of 
symmetry 


Figure 7.2 The Infinite Square Well. Note 
the center of symmetry at the midpoint of 
the box. the point x = 0. 


E i 


t r 2 a 2 

2 mL 2 ' 


(7.40) 


And, in Example 6.1 (§ 6.2), we proved that the corresponding time-dependent function, 


^i(M) 





(7.41) 


satisfies the TDSE for this system. 

The function \&i(a;,f) clearly has the characteristic form ^(a:) 0 f a sta¬ 

tionary state, with spatial function 



And it’s easy to verify that this function satisfies the time-independent Schrodinger 
equation of this system, Eq. (7.39), with E = E x given by (7.40). But in practice 
we must be able to obtain this spatial function—and those for all the other stationary 
states—by solving the TISE. We need a game plan. 

I’m going to lay out and then illustrate a systematic strategy for solving the TISE 
for the bound-state spatial functions and energies of any one-dimensional system. The 
particular algebraic machinations required to solve this equation depend, of course, on 
the particular potential energy—but this overall strategy does not. There are only three 
steps: 


Step 1. Write down the general solution to the time-independent Schrodinger Equa¬ 
tion. 

Step 2. Apply the boundary conditions imposed by the potential energy to the 
general solution of Step 1. 

Step 3. Normalize the bound-state spatial functions from Step 2. 

It is the second step—imposition of the boundary conditions—that leads to quantization 
of the energies of the stationary states, as you’ll see in the following example. 

Example 7.2. The Stationary States of a Particle in a Box 

Since the particle is free inside the box (where V = 0), we could simply write down a 
general solution to the TISE in this region as a linear combination of the complex expo¬ 
nential functions for a free particle in Eqs. (7.33). I prefer, however, to use the alternate, 
equivalent real trigonometric functions cos(px/h) and sin (px/h). Because they are real, 
these functions are easier to work with than their exponential cousins. Here, then, is a 
general solution to the TISE in the region where the spatial functions are non-zero: 


250 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



(7.43) 


tPe{x) = C cos (^ x ^j + 77sin (^ x> j • 

Note that the momentum and energy are related by p = V2mE. At this stage, the constants 
C and D in this linear combination are arbitrary, and p and E are unconstrained— e.g. t the 
energy can take on any value greater than zero. 

That’s step 1. Following our three-step procedure, we now implement the boundary 
conditions (7.37). Let’s start at the right wall (x = +\L). Applying condition (7.376) to 
the general solution (7.43), we get 

Ccos (fif) +i5sin (ftf) = a (7 - 44) 

How can we pick C and D to enforce this requirement? We certainly can’t choose C = 0 
and D = 0, for this choice would imply that iPe(x) = 0, the position probability density is 
zero everywhere, and there is no particle. And there is no value of p such that both the sine 
and cosine functions in (7.44) are zero, because sine and cosine are linearly independent 
functions. Evidently we must set one and only one of the arbitrary constants equal to zero— 
either C = 0 or D = 0. To ensure that the remaining sine or cosine function in (7.44) is 
non-zero, we must constrain the argument of this function. Here are the two possibilities: 

C = 0 (D t^O) and sin (fr^) (7.45 a) 

or 

D = 0 (C^O) and cos (fif) =a (7.456) 

In either case, the resulting spatial functions will obey the boundary condition at the right 
wall. Surprisingly, they will also obey the boundary condition at the left wall. 

Question 7-4 

Argue from the symmetry properties of the spatial function (7.43) that a solution of 
the TISE that satisfies (7.376) must also satisfy (7.37 a). Now apply the boundary 
condition at the left wall (7.37a), to the general solution (7.43). Show that you obtain 
the same restrictions on C, D, and p, Eqs. (7.45). 

The requirements (7.45) imply that valid spatial functions for the particle in a box 
exist only for values of p such that the sine or the cosine of pL/(2h) is zero. The zeroes 
(or nodes ) of these trigonometric functions occur at discrete, equally spaced values of their 
argument: 


COS0 

= 0 

for 

e = 

7T 37r 57T 

2 ’ ~2' ~2^“ * 

(7.46a) 

sind 

= 0 

for 

e = 

0, 7T, 27T, .... 

(7.466) 

Applying Eqs. (7.46) to the functions in 

(7.45), 

we see that 11 



= 0 

if 

p = 

27t h 4irh 6irh 

(7.47a) 

cos (^) 

= 0 

if 

V = 

7rfr 37 xh 5nh 

T ,- zr ,- zr’"' 

(7.476) 

11 Although sinfl = 0 for 6 

= o, 

we exclude p = 

0 from (7.476), because 

the only zero-energy 


solution of (7.39) corresponds to the uninteresting case ip(x) = 0 (no particle). The TISE for E = 0 becomes 
d 2 if)(x)/dx 2 = 0. The solution of this equation that is continuous at the walls is 0(x) = ax + 6, and this 
solution can satisfy the boundary conditions (7.37) only if a = b = 0, i.e., if iJj(x) = 0. For more on this 
point see the articles by M. Bowen and J. Coster, Amer. Jour, of Phys., 49, 80 (1981) and by R. Sapp, 
Amer. Jour, of Phys. 50, 1159 (1982). 

Sec. 7.4 A Particle in ah Escape-Proof Box 251 



Equations (7.47) imply that the momentum of the particle in a box is quantized ; i.e., 
spatial functions that satisfy the boundary conditions imposed by the potential exist only for 
discrete values of p in the list 


nk 27 rh 37 xh Anh 

T’T’T’T 



(7.47c) 


We can conveniently index these values by introducing a positive integer n = 1, 2, 3, 
and writing (7.47c) as 



for n = 1,2,3,... . [for the infinite square well] 


(7.48) 


Notice that each allowed value of the momentum corresponds to one and only one type of 
spatial function: either to Eq. (7.47a) [for n = 2, 4, 6, ... ] or to Eq. (7.476) [for n= 1, 
3,5,...]. 

Since E = p 2 /(2m), these restrictions on p imply restrictions on E\ to wit: the 
allowed stationary-state energies of a particle of mass m in a box of width L are 


E n 


7 T 2 k 2 
2 mi 2 


for n = 1,2,3,... 


[for the infinite square well] 


(7.49) 


Our derivation of Eq. (7.49) exemplifies an extremely important general principle of bound 
states: 


Rule 

The two boundary conditions imposed by the potential energy that confines a particle to a 
finite region of space (in a bound quantum state) force quantization of energy. 


But what about the spatial functions? We discovered [Eqs. (7.45)] that these functions 
come in two types. To write these down explicitly, let’s use (7.48) for p n in Eq. (7.45): 


TYPE I: 









(*) 

= C cos 

(t») ] 




or 




> n = 1,3,5,... 

(7.50a) 


4 e) 

(*) 

= C cos 

(”!) 1 



TYPE II: 


(*) 

= D sin | 

PH ) 




or 




► n = 2,4,6,... 

(7.506) 



(x) 

= D sin | 

H) J 




In Eqs. (7.50) I’ve introduced two labels on the spatial functions: a subscript n and 
a superscript, (e) or (o). The index n is called a quantum number. Notice that once we 
know n, we know the values of the energy [Eq. (7.49)] and the momentum [Eq. (7.48)] for 
the corresponding stationary state. The superscript indicates the parity of the function. All 
TYPE I functions are even, 


II 

TT 

QJ 

[n = 1,3,5,...1 

(7.51a) 

and all TYPE II functions are odd, 

[n = 2,4,6,...). 

(7.516) 


252 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 





Notice that we can accommodate both types of spatial functions with a single index, since 
each n= 1,2, 3, ... corresponds to one and only one type: odd values to cosine functions 
[Eq. (7.50 a], even values to sine functions [Eq. (7.506)]. 

Step 3 of the solution of the TISE is to normalize the spatial functions. Let’s do the 
odd-parity functions first. From Eq. (7.27), the normalization condition is 12 

+ L/2 

1= J tf£ o) *(®)^i 0> (: v)dx n = 2,4,6,... (7.52) 

-LI 2 

+ L/ 2 

= 1^1 2 J sin 2 dx (7.53) 

-L/2 

= \ D \ 2 \■ (7.54) 

We might as well choose D to be real so the spatial functions will be real. We conclude 
that all the odd-parity eigenfunctions are normalized by the same factor, D = y/2/L. 
Remarkably, this factor also normalizes the even-parity spatial functions. 

Question 7-5 

Consider the normalization of the even-parity functions and verify the claim in the last 
sentence. That is, show that to normalize ip { n e) (x) of Eq. (7.506), we use C = y/2/L. 

The fact that the same normalization constant can be used for all spatial functions is 
a peculiarity of the infinite square well. In general, normalization constants are different for 
different stationary states. 

To summarize our findings, here are the normalized spatial functions for the particle 
in a box: 


(7.55) 


For each spatial function, the corresponding energy is given by Eq. (7.49). If we want to 
highlight the variation in energy with n, we can write E n in terms of the ground state energy 
Ei, as 

[for the infinite square well] (7.56) 

These energies are sketched in Fig. 7.3. Diagrams such as this one are called, sensibly, 
energy-level diagrams. The list of allowed stationary-state energies is called—by spectro- 
scopists, among others—the energy spectrum. 

The full time-dependent wave function for each stationary state is easily constructed 
from the spatial functions (7.55), as 

»«(*.*) = Mx)e- iE " t/r ‘. (7.57) 

12 Watch the limits of integration: the spatial function is zero outside the box, so the integrals run not 
from -oo to +oo but rather from -L/2 to +L/2. To evaluate the integral in (7.53), just change the dummy 
variable of integration from x to u = mxx/L. 




Sec. 7.4 A Particle in an Escape-Proof Box 253 






Figure 7.3 An energy-level diagram for the particle in a box. For convenience. 
I’ve plotted the (first six) stationary-state energies in units of E\ [see Eq. (7.56)). 
Beside each energy is the symbol of the corresponding spatial function. 


For example, the first three such functions are 


'MM) 



n 2 k 2 
2mL' 2 ’ 


(7.58«) 


MM) = 


2 . / x 

l sm r z 


2 mL 2 ' 


(7.58/?) 


«s(*, t)= \jl «>s (3*|) E 


, _ 9t x 2 h 2 
3 2 mL 2 ’ 


(7.58c) 


These fellows are displayed along with their probability densities in Fig. 7.4. 


Remarkable Symmetries 


As we relax, feet up, drink in hand, reviewing the results of our first quantum triumph, 
we notice an interesting pattern in the stationary-state spatial functions of Fig. 7.4: as 
the energy E n increases, the functions ip n (a’) alternate parity, beginning with the even 
ground state il)[ e \x). This pattern is typical of stationary-state spatial functions for one¬ 
dimensional potentials that are symmetric with respect to a center of symmetry. To see 
what I’m talking about, have another look at this potential in Fig. 7.2. 

The center of symmetry of a potential is the point on the x axis with respect to 
which V (x*) is even. In Fig. 7.2, the midpoint of the infinite square well is its center of 
symmetry. That is, if we define this point as the origin of coordinates, x = 0, then the 
function V'(x) is symmetric with respect to inversion through this point, the symmetry 
operation x h-> — x. This is the definition of a symmetric potential: 


254 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 




Figure 7.4 Spatial functions and corresponding probability densities for the n = 1, 2, 
and 3 stationary states of the infinite square well. See Eqs. (7.58) for the analytic form 
of these spatial functions. Note the symmetry of these functions about the center of 
symmetry (arrow). 


V(—x ) = V{x). symmetric potential (7.59) 

In Fig. 7.5a you’ll find a few other symmetric potentials. These examples differ in a 
visually obvious way from those in Fig. 7.5b, which do not have a center of symmetry. 
As you might guess, these unfortunates are called asymmetric potentials. 

Why am I making a big deal out of the symmetry of the potential? Simply because 
the symmetry properties of a system (/.<?., of the potential energy of the system) has 
great power to simplify problem solving in quantum mechanics and to aid us in gaining 
profound insight into the physics of physical systems. For example, shortly (§ 9.4) we’ll 
prove that the pattern in Fig. 7.4 pertains to all symmetric potentials: 


Rule 

All bound-state spatial functions of a one-dimensional system with a symmetric potential 
have definite parity. For such a system, the ground state is even, and the higher-energy 
functions alternate parity with increasing energy. 


As we apply quantum mechanics to various systems, in Part III, you’ll see how greatly 
this simple, seemingly magical rule eases the algebraic (and, in complicated problems, 
numerical) difficulties that confront us. 


Sec. 7.4 A Particle in an Escape-Proof Box 255 



X 


(b) 

Figure 7.5 Examples of (a) symmetric and (b) asymmetric one-dimensional potentials. 

Shown in (a) is the harmonic oscillator potential K(a;) = mWg.T 2 /2 and a symmetric 
finite square well, and in (b) an anharmonic oscillator (the Morse potential) and an 
asymmetric square well. The symmetry of the potentials in (a) markedly simplifies the 
chore of calculating their spatial functions. 

Question 7-6 

Repeat my solution of the TISE for the particle in a box, starting with a linear combination 
of complex exponential functions, (7.34). Show that you wind up with the same spatial 
functions (7.55), albeit after a bit more work. 

Question 7-7 

Suppose that in setting up the TISE for the particle in a box, we had chosen the origin of 
coordinates (x = 0) at the left wall, rather than at the midpoint of the well. What are the 
spatial functions in these coordinates? (Hint: Solve this problem two ways; first by directly 
solving the TISE, and second by implementing a change of variable x x - L/2.) Why 
is this choice of origin a bad idea? 

Aside: An Introduction to Curvature Arguments. It isn’t hard to understand the 
alternating parity of the spatial functions of the infinite square well. The key to 
such insight is a mathematical property of each function called its curvature. The 
curvature of iJ)e(x) is simply its second derivative, d 2 tpE(x)/dx 2 . (Loosely speaking, 
this quantity describes how rapidly the function “turns over” as x changes.) The TISE 
shows that the curvature of i})e{x) is related to the value of E , since 

J^ Mx) = 

So the greater the curvature of iPe(x), the greater the magnitude of E. Now, of the 
spatial functions in (7.55), the one with the smallest curvature is y/2/Lcos(nx/L). 


256 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



(This function fits half of a cosine wave into the box.) So it is the spatial function of 
minimum energy. The function with the next smallest curvature fits a full sine wave 
into the box. And so forth. 

The Stationary State of Minimum Energy 

Of the many non-classical features exhibited by the particle in a box, perhaps none is 
more striking than that it is never at rest. A particle at rest in a region of zero potential 
energy would have zero total energy. But we’ve just proven [see Eq. (7.56)] that the 
minimum allowed energy for a particle in a such a region—inside the infinite square 
well—is greater than zero. What causes this incessant motion? The potential is zero, 
so no forces act on the particle (except the impulsive forces at the wall). Therefore the 
non-zero kinetic energy of the particle in the infinite square well must be due to the simple 
fact that it is confined to a finite region. This astonishing conclusion is quite contrary to 
any classical intuition we may still be carrying around. 

Although this result fell out of our solution of the TISE for the infinite square well, 
it hinges on the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. To appreciate the essential connection 
between this principle and the non-zero minimum energy of a confined particle, let’s 
consider an ensemble of identical particle-in-a-box systems, each in the stationary state 
with the minimum allowed total energy. We’ll pretend that we don’t know the value of 
this energy, which I’ll call E m \ n . The question is: could E mm be zero? 

What do we know about the energy? Since the state of the members is stationary, 
its energy is sharp. So all members have the same value of the energy, E mm , which 
they exhibit in an energy measurement. The ensemble average and uncertainty in the 
measured energy are 

(E) = E min and A E = 0. (7.60) 

To argue that the minimum energy must be positive, we need to look briefly to a differ¬ 
ent observable, position. From position, we’ll return to momentum via the Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle and thence to the energy. 

The position probability densities graphed in Fig. 7.4 show that in this stationary 
state, position is not sharp— i.e., the position uncertainty Aa; is positive. But neither is 
Ax infinite, because the particles can’t escape from their boxes. So, without performing 
any calculations, we can put upper and lower bounds on the position uncertainty: 

0 < Arc < L. [for the particle in a box] (7.61) 

These limits imply that the momentum uncertainty in this state must be positive, 
because, according to Heisenberg, Ax Ap > h/2. (Recall from Example 5.6 that the 
momentum uncertainty for the ground state is A p = irh/L.) 

Now, think carefully about what Ap > 0 implies about the individual results 
of the ensemble measurement: they must fluctuate about the mean momentum, (p). 
[For this stationary state, the magnitude of the mean momentum is related to E m \ n by 
(p) = Pm in = \/2ra£ in j n .] But if various individual results differ from one another, then 
at least one member must exhibit a non-zero momentum, |p|. The energy of this member 
is |p| 2 /(2m) > 0. 

But since A E = 0, all members of the ensemble have the same (sharp) energy, 
E m i n . We conclude, therefore, that £ In j n , the smallest possible sharp energy of a particle 
in an infinite square well, must be positive. 


Sec. 7.4 A Particle in an Escape-Proof Box 257 



Question 7-8 

Thought Question: Consider an ensemble of particle-in-a-box systems in an arbitrary 
state— i.e., one that is not necessarily stationary. In an energy measurement, can any member 
of the ensemble exhibit the value E = 0? Why or why not? 

Aside: Uncertainty and Quantization. Does the non-zero momentum uncertainty 
for stationary states of the infinite square well seem to contradict Eq. (7.48), which 
gives the quantized values of p„? It doesn’t, really, because momentum is a directed 
quantity. Equation (7.48) specifies the magnitude of p„, but not its direction. To see 
the significance of the directed nature of momentum, we need only note that each 
function (7.58) is a linear combination of two travelling waves moving in opposite 
directions. For example, we can write the ground-state spatial function as 

So the momentum in such a state is not sharp, even though its magnitude is well 
defined. 

Question 7-9 

Deduce the value of ( p) n for any stationary state of the particle in a box. (Hint: Think, 
don’t calculate, and re-read the above aside if you have trouble.) 

The infinite square well is beloved of quantum pedagogues (such as your author), 
because it provides an algebraically simple problem that illustrates general problem¬ 
solving strategies and a host of quantum phenomena. And, as you’ll discover as you 
solve the problems at the end of this chapter, it’s a surprisingly good model of many 
“real-world” microscopic systems. 

Still, the particle in a box is artificial in two noteworthy respects. First, potential 
differences in the real world may be very large, but they are never infinite. Second, real 
potentials are never discontinuous, as is the infinite square well at the walls. Because of 
these features, the spatial functions of the infinite square well are discontinuous at the 
walls—a difficulty that in the real world never rears its ugly head. 13 


7.5 A CLOSER LOOK AT STATIONARITY 

In § 7.3 we explored the mathematical properties of stationary states and the equation 
from whence they come, the time-independent Schrodinger equation. In this section we’ll 
focus on the physical properties of these states and, in particular, on the meaning of the 
adjective “stationary.” Colloquially, this word means unmoving, static, time-independent. 
So let’s investigate the time-dependence of the quantities that describe a bound stationary 
quantum state: the expectation value, uncertainty, and probability density. 

The probability density for an arbitrary state P(x , t) = t) does depend 

on time. But for a stationary state, this quantity is trivially time-independent, because 
the exponential factors in the wave function ^(x,t) = 7p n (x)e~ lE,,t ^ ri and its complex 
conjugate cancel: 

13 Thcse discontinuities have generated considerable discussion in the pedagogical literature of quantum 
physics, including one paper with the marvelously ominous title “The Particle in a Box Is Not Simple,” by F. 
E. Cummings, Anter. Jour. ofPhys. 45, 158 (1977). See also D. Home and S. Sengupta, Amer. Jour. ofPhys. 
50, 522 (1982). 


258 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



( 7 . 62 ) 


P n (x,t) — P n {x ) — 1p n (x)lp n (x). 

Be not misled: although the probability density doesn’t change with time, the wave 
function does. The point is that the time-dependent factor in the wave function is just 
a global phase factor, and (Chap. 3) all state functions are arbitrary to within such a 
factor. So ^(x,t) and \P(a;, 0) represent the same physical state. In this light, it’s not 
surprising that all measurable properties of such a state are time independent. 

The time-independence of plays a vital role in evaluating statistical quantities 
for a stationary state. For an arbitrary quantum state (one that is not stationary), these 
quantities for an observable Q do depend on time (see § 5.6): 

<0X0= / 'i'(x,t)Qty(x,t)dx. (7.63 a) 


A 0(0 = \ /(O 2 ) - (0> 2 - (7.63 b) 

But does this time dependence persist if the state represented by ^{x,t) is stationary? 
To find out, let’s return to the observable we’ve been investigating in this chapter. 

The Energy 


From our calculations on the stationary states of the infinite square well (§ 7.4), we 
conclude that for these states, the quantities (7.63) do not depend on time. Their values 
are 


<£>„ = K 

(A E)„ = 0 


[n th stationary state] 


(7.64) 


I want to show you now that this time-independence is a general property of stationary 
states. 

Example 7.3. The Energy of a Stationary State 

For Q = fi and ^(x, t) = ip tl (x)e~ ,E " t/r \ the ensemble average (7.63 a) of the energy is 

(B)„ = P rAx)e+ iE "' /h W„(x)e- iB " , ' n dx. (7.65) 


The Hamiltonian for a conservative system, 

- h 2 d 2 . 

n = ~2mdxi + V{x) ’ < 7 ' 66 > 

does not alter a function of time such as e~ iEt,h , so the time factors in this expectation 
value cancel, leaving the time-independent value 

{ E )„ = / 1pn(x)Hlp n (x)dx. (7.67 a) 

J — OC 

This proves that the time-independence seen in (7.64) for the infinite square well holds for 
the stationary states of any conservative system. 

It also proves the generality of the relationship between the ( E ) and the allowed 
energies in (7.64). To see this, we just apply the TISE, = E n i/f„(x), to (7.67a) 

to get 


Sec. 7.5 A Closer Look at Stationarity 259 



(E) n = E n f ^n(x)tpn (x)dx, 

J — oo 


and use the normalization integral (7.27) to conclude 

[n th stationary state] 


(E) n = E u 


The same reasoning applies to the uncertainty 


(AE)(f) = ,/(£*) -(B) 2 , 
which, according to (7.68), is simply 


(A E) n (t) = 


(1.61b) 


(7.68) 


(7.69) 


(7.70) 


In the expectation value (E 2 ) n , the time factors cancel, just as they did in (1.61a), leaving 

/ OO 

(7-71) 

-oc 

Applying the TISE twice to ip n (x) (and remembering that the product of two operators 
means successive operation), we can simplify the integrand in (7.71), to wit: 


n 2 Mx) = nn^ n (x) 
= E n Hi>n{x) 
= E n 1p n {x). 


(1.12a) 


So the mean value (7.71) is just 

(E 2 )=E 2 n (1.12b) 

and from (7.70), the uncertainty in any bound stationary state of any system is 


(A E)» = 0 


[n th stationary state] 


(7.73) 


Question 7-10 

In Chap. 6, I noted that the Hamiltonian is equivalent to the operator £ = ihd/dt 
—indeed, we can write the lime-dependent Schrodinger equation in operator form as 7 i = £. 
Consequently, we should be able to evaluate the expectation value and uncertainty of the 
energy for any quantum state either from H or from £, e.g.. 


(E) n = (£) 



'$!*(x,t)i'lj(x,t)dx. 


Derive Eqs. (7.68) and (7.73) for a stationary state using £ rather than H\ e.g., show that 


(£) n = E„ and (A5)„ = 0. 


260 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 





Further Generalizations , Other Operators 


What made the evaluation of ( E ) and of (A E) for a stationary state so trivial was the 
special relationship between the Hamiltonian and the wave function for such a state, 
H'&n = E n ty n . This simple relationship doesn’t apply to an arbitrary operator Q, 
and evaluating these statistical quantities for an arbitrary observable does require some 
algebra (see the multitude of examples in Part III). But we can easily generalize the 
proof in Example 7.3 that ( E) and A E for a stationary state are time-independent to an 
arbitrary observable. 

Suppose the observable Q doesn’t explicitly depend on time. The expectation value 
(7.63a) for the nth stationary state is 

(0X0= r il>:(x)e +iE " ,/r 'Qil>n(x)e- iE " ,lt 'dx. (7.74) 

7 — 00 


Look at the time factors in this equation. Regardless of the form of Q, these factors 
cancel, leaving a time-independent expectation value, 


{Q)„ = [ il>»(x)Q4> n (x)dx. 

J — oc 

The same argument applies to the uncertainty, 

(A Q)n = \/«n, -«?>?,. 

We now understand precisely what is meant by stationarity: 


{1.15a) 


{1.15b) 


Rule 

In a stationary state all physically measurable properties of a (time-independent) observable 
are static; i.e., probabilities, expectation values, and uncertainties do not change with time. 


Aside: Rates of Change. You will sometimes see the time-independence of quantum- 
mechanical quantities expressed in tenns of the rate of change of the probability 
density, as 


~^P{x, t) = 0. [in a stationary state] (7.76) 

The counterpart of this form for an observable Q is 

J t <<?>„ = 0. (7.77) 

For example, in a stationary state, the mean value of the energy is constant, 

It <*>. = 0. (7.78) 

This is the quantum-mechanical counterpart of the classical law of conservation of 
energy in a conservative (macroscopic) system (Chap. 11). 

Sec. 7.5 A Closer Look at Stationarity 261 




lo Flow or Not to Flow? 


Before leaving this discussion, let’s look at the time dependence of the probability current 
density [Eq. (6.112)] 


*<«*) = -£ 




(7.79) 


In general, j(x,t) is a function of time—indeed, it is this time dependence that gives rise 
to the colorful (and useful) notion of a probability fluid that flows through space. But 
if the state represented by ^(a;,f) is stationary, the time factors in \P(x,t), its complex 
conjugate, and their derivatives all cancel, leaving 


jn{ x ) — 


ih 

2m 




(7.80) 


So the probability current density in a stationary state is independent of time. Such a 
current density describes steady state flow—like that of the pure momentum function 
(Example 6.6). 


Question 7-11 

We can arrive at this conclusion via a different path. The rate equation for the integrated 
position probability in a finite region [a, b] is [Eq. (6.119)] 

^ Pn ( [o> t ) = j n (®) t) ~ jn (&» t). 

Starting from this equation, prove that the probability current density for a stationary state 
is independent of time. 


For a bound state in one dimension, a further simplification to the probability 
current density (7.80) ensues. Because the TISE and the boundary conditions on a 
bound-state wave function are real , the spatial function that solves this equation, ^(z), 
is real. So j tl {x) = 0. This means that there is no probability flow in a one-dimensional 
bound state. 

Aside: Probability Flow in Three Dimensions. To glimpse the nature of probability 
flow for a three-dimensional system, consider the equation for pointwise conservation 
of probability [see Eq. (6.125) and Table 6.1] for a stationary-state wave function. 

The probability density for such a state doesn’t depend on time, 

r t p ^ t)=0 ’ 

so the probability current density obeys 

Vj(r,i) = 0. 

This result shows that the probability flow in a stationary state of a three-dimensional 
system is solenoidal. The probability current density is zero only if the spatial function 
^(r) is real—which is not necessarily the case for a bound state in three dimensions. 

A final cautionary note: Some novice quantum mechanics slip into the trap of 
thinking that the name “stationary state” implies that the particles in such a state are at 
rest. We know (§ 7.4) that for a bound state, this is false: the minimum kinetic energy 
of a (confined) particle is always positive. It is, of course, not the particle, but rather its 
physical properties that are stationary, in the sense discussed in this section. 


262 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



(a) Write down the general form of the wave pacKci .; ; 

momentum states. Discuss how you would control the mixture of 

so that the function with momentum p« = hk 0 is the most important constituent, of the 

wavc pa- - “ - w rrsrr*. 

tb) classic^* 6 velocfty°of Z panicle^., = dE/dp. Discuss the physical sigaificapce of this 
result. 

Problems 

4.1 Construction of a Simple Wave Packet we sha| , 

The general form of a real harmonic wave is given by Eq. ( 4 . 3 k m inis p 

actually constntc, a wave packet by supe^oshig a ^ X*. foiiowiag 

(a) Draw an accurate graph of the sum of six real h« rmon.c 

wavelengths: 

A := 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 19, »nd 2.0 cm. 

Take the amplitude of each wave to be 1.0 cm. Adjust the phase coos,ants so that each 
harmonic wave satisfies the condition 

/(xo.to) = l° cin - 

. e i | < lOOcm (Note: You will probably find it 
Sketch the composite packet for |x| < lU.ucm. l 

convenient to choose Xo = 0 and = ° ) . r orrne d and the 

(W P^UC, ,s a numbet of the otdet 

cf unity. ■ a „- ne / f region of enhancement n this case, since 

Remark: Notice that we do not obtain a sing e re S hamonic waves are in 

there are always several values of x where all the constituent ^ tornx*^ ^ 

phase. Several regions inevitably result w en we super ^ ^ s |g reg j on 0 f enhancement, 

with wave numbers that differ by finite ' with infinitesimally differing wave 

we must superpose an infinite number of harmonic wav 
, numbers, as in the following problem. 

^ 4.2 Wave Packet Construction Can Be Fun - mn i;inrte function The general form 

,LCS build u wttve pucke, usjhg •^ 
of the wave packet is given by Eqs. (4.29). where \ t 

this problem, we won’t assume that particle is tecessai. yf 
Consider the amplitude function 

[0 k < k 0 - K ,fc; 
at*)- 7h b„-fAk<k<k„ + ^; 

{ 0 k>k 0 + ^sk. 

PART A Consider the initial time, t- 0. 

(a) Evaluate the state function 'P(x.O). 

(b) Evaluate the position probability density at^-^ ^ ^ wave packe[ conforms to the 

(c) Graph the probability density v . . , . For Al use thc location of the 

Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Ax Ap - . adequate approximation to the 

( d, a ——*%*££** dcnsUy 0,1=0 

hZ\zz •»* *■ dcnsiiy as a 

function of the scaled variable x/(2tt/AA:). 


Exercises and Problems 139 





PART B In Chaj. 6 we’ll investigate wave packet propagation. As a preview! cons der the 
behavior of the v ave packet of part A at times t > 0, using Eq. (4.29) as a starting joint, 

(a) To simplify the integrand of t), expand w(k) in a Taylor series about k = ko, 
retaining on y terms through first order. Show that your result can be written 

w(fc) = oj 0 + v g ,{k-ko), 

where wo = w(A = ko) and v gr is the group velocity of the wave packet eval; ited at 
k = ko. Unrsr what conditions on A k is this approximation to w(k) valid? 

Hint: The T /lor series expansion of a function f(x) about a point x = xo is 


f(x) = /(*o) + (*-*o)/'(*o) 

, (* - *o ) 2 M. x , 


+ • • • + (3: (n 5 - 3 !)! - f{n ~ l) (xc) + remain ‘ 5r - 


where /'(xr is the first derivative df/dx evaluated at xo, etc. The usefulness if this 
expansion is somewhat limited, because it can be applied only to functions that satisfy 
a rather den inding criteria: the derivatives of /(x) to all orders must exist ar must 
be finite. N netheless, the Taylor series is invaluable, and if you haven’t stud :d it I 
recommend :at you read § 16.3 of Calculus and Analytic Geometry, 3rd ed. by ieorge 
B. Thomas, \ (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1960). 

(b) Now, carry ut the integration over k and thereby obtain an explicit expression or the 
state functio and thence for the probability density P(x,t) in terms of x, t, t f , and 
A k. Verify iat your result agrees with that of pari (b) at t = 0. How- is P{x,t) elated 
to P(x — v g , ,0)? What docs your answer to this question imply about the prop gation 
of this wave jacket? Does it retain its shape? 

(c) Let x,,,** de ote the position of the maximum of P(x,t). Write an equation or the 
time depend* ice of x„, ax . 

(d) Now suppose that you are sitting on the x axis—say. at a point xt- > 0—w« :ching 
all the waves go by. Describe (in words or with sketches or both) what you se i, i.e., 
describe the probability density considered as a function of lime at a fixed position. 

(e) Let A t denote the time interval that separates the arrival at x 0 of the central peak of 
/>(x t t) and the adjacent node. Show that this wave packet leads to the "energy-time 
uncertainty relation" AE&tzsh. 

Remark: This extremely important problem reinforces (he point made in this chapter: incer- 
tninty relations an inevitable consequences of the use of wave packets to represent st. tes of 
subatomic particle . More precise definition of the uncertainties involved would have 'ed to 
the “precise” uncc tainty principles of this chapter and Chap. 11. 

4.3 Coping with Comj lex Amplitude Functions 

Using Eq. (4.30), isc a stationary phase argument to show that the center of a wave -acket 
constructed from t complex amplitude function occurs at 


X0 = ~dk 


4.4 Unmasking the Tr c Nature of a Wave Packet 
Consider the sinto ‘unction 


»l<(,).',()) H /Vox|* ( •••/; |,r|] c ikaT 

(II) Nill'IillllUo Hi If fuilHinn, 

(h) Ijutivt! 11 to t.eriuNpoitdliig umplilmio ftiiidlloii A(k) m > s (tl'(«!,0)| mul thereby dunon- 
strale that this wave packet is actually a supeiposition of pmc tiiOlllClMtith stales. 

(c) Verify that your amplitude function is normalized. 


'-/ v . V • ... .i 

Ml) nhniL 4 At. UUrnt.Olivo Interlude 

...... • ■ , 



The essential point of this section is that (for observables that don’t explicitly 
depend on time) we can just forget about the time dependence of a stationary-state wave 
function and calculate probabilities and statistical quantities directly from the spatial 
function ij) n (x). But for a state that is not stationary, the probability density and ( Q) (i) 
and (AQ)(f) may well depend on time. In the next section of this chapter, we’ll put 
stationarity in its place by looking briefly at such a state. 


*7.6 SUPERPOSTIONS OF STATIONARY STATES 

I want to be sure you don’t overlook the very special, limited nature of stationary states. 14 
First, not all systems have stationary states—separable solutions to the TDSE exist only 
for conservative systems. Second, all systems—conservative or not—exist in states that 
aren’t stationary. 

In general, some states of an arbitrary system are bound and some are not. But in 
either case, the non-stationary wave functions of such a system are not simple products 
like ^(a;)C(f); rather, like the Gaussian (7.3), they are complicated beasties in which 
position and time variables are inextricably intertwined. 

Personally, I’m more comfortable with non-stationary states, for their physical 
properties are more akin to what I expect of a particle in motion. For example, the 
expectation value and uncertainty of position for a microscopic particle in a non-stationary 
state change with time, as does the position of a macroscopic particle in motion. 

So I want to close this chapter on stationary states with a preview of their non- 
stationary siblings. For future reference, I’ve collected the properties of these two kinds 
of states in Table 7.1. In this section, we’ll look briefly at how non-stationary states are 
constructed and at the properties of a single observable—the energy —in such a state. 


TABLE 7.1 STATIONARY VS. NON-STATIONARY STATES. 



Stationary 

Non-Stationary 

State Function 

^(.t,<) = (x)e~ iEt / h 

^(x - , f) not separable 

Energy 

sharp: AE = 0 

not sharp: AE(£) > 0 

Average Energy 

(E) = E, independent of t 

(E) independent of t 

Position Probability Density 

P(x) = |,Mz)l 2 

p(*,f) = i« , (*.f)i 2 

Observable Q 

(Q) independent of t 

(Q) (£) may depend on t 


The Energy in a Non-Stationary State 

One way to construct a wave function for a non-stationary state is to superpose some 
stationary-state wave functions, controlling the mixture of each contributing stationary 
state in our non-stationary brew by assigning each a coefficient. We did just this in 
Chap. 4, where we constructed a continuum wave function (a wave packet) for a free 


14 This seclion is an advance look at material we’ll cover in depth in Chap. 12, so you can skip it if 
you want to. 


Sec. 7.6 Superpositions of Stationary States 263 




particle by superposing pure momentum functions, using the amplitude function to control 
the mixture in the packet. Because the pure momentum functions are functions of infinite 
extent, we had to superpose an infinite number of them to produce a spatially localized 
wave packet. 

Similarly, we can use superposition to construct non-stationary wave functions for 
bound states. But unlike their continuum counterparts, bound-state wave packets are 
spatially localized even if they include only a finite number of contributors, because 
each of these contributors is itself spatially localized. I wrote down one such function 
for the infinite square well in Example 6.4 [Eq. (6.63)]: 


*(*,*) 





+ 7ip 2 (x)e- iE2l/t ' 


(7.81) 


Notice that two values of the energy appear in this function, E\ and E 2 . This duplicity 
of energies suggests that the energy of the state represented by the superposition function 
is not sharp. Indeed, it isn’t. The energy uncertainty for this non-stationary state 
is positive, as we’ll now demonstrate. 

Example 7.4. The Strange Case of the Uncertain Energy 

The energy uncertainty (A E)(t) = \/(E 2 ) - (E) 2 depends on two expectation values, 
(E) ( t ) and ( E 2 ). The first of these is the mean value of the energy; for the state represented 
by (7.81), this value is 


+ L( 2 

<£>(«) J [2tM*)e +iEl,/ * + 7<M*)e +iEjl/ ' 1 ] 

-L/2 

x H [2Mx)e~ iElt/b + 7ip2(x)e~ iE2t/h ] dx. 


(7.82) 


The (real) spatial functions in (7.82) are given by Eqs. (7.55), and their energies by (7.56). 
The worst path to take at this point is to substitute these functions, their energies, and the 
explicit form of the Hamiltonian into this equation; this path leads immediately into a thorny 
patch of messy algebra. 

We can avoid the briar patch by leaving the spatial functions and energies unspecified 
as long as possible. For example, from the TISE we know what the Hamiltonian does to 
the spatial functions in the integrand: 

H + 7Mx)e~‘ E2t/ *] (7 g3) 

= 2Eiiii(x)e~ IE ' l/t ' + 7E2ifo{x)e~ iEll/h . 


So we can write (7.82) as four similar integrals, 

+ L/2 +L/2 


{ TU/4 <‘-‘1 * 

4Ei J ipiixtyi^dx + 14Ei J il)2{x)'ip\(x)dxe ,{ ' E ‘ 2 ~ El)l,h 

-L/2 -L/2 

+ L/2 +L/2 n 

+14 E 2 J iffi{x)ip 2 (x)dxe~ l(kE2 ~ El ^ /h + 49i?2 J dx >. 


(7.84) 


These four integrals fall into two classes. Two are normalization integrals of the 
form (7.27). These are easy to evaluate: 


264 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



+ L/2 


ip\(x)ijji(x)dx = 1 


-L/2 
+ L/ 2 


J &(x 


)%Jj 2 (x)dx = 1. 


-L/2 


(7.85) 


The other two are integrals of two different spatial functions. Since the spatial functions 
(7.55) are real, these integrals are equal: 

+ W2 +L/2 + L/2 

J rp 2 (x)ipi{x)dx= J ^i{x)rl) 2 {x)dx = | J cos ^?r^ sin ^2?r^ rfx. (7.86) 


-L/2 


-L/2 


-L/2 


I hope you recognize this as the orthogonality integral for the sine and cosine functions— 
and remember that this integral equals zero. If not, please go refresh your memory with a 
glance at Eq. (4.45). 15 Inserting Eqs. (7.85) and (7.86) into the expectation value (7.84), we 
get (with refreshingly little work) the ensemble average of the energy in the non-stationary 
state (7.81), 


( E ) = ^( 4E i +49£ 2 ) = = 3.777?!. (7.87) 

Notice that this is not equal to any of the eigenvalues E n of the Hamiltonian. This 
exemplifies a general result for all non-stationary states: the average value of the energy 
of a particle in a non-stationary state is not one of the energy eigenvalues. Nevertheless, 
in an energy measurement each member of the ensemble exhibits one and only one of 
these eigenvalues (Chap. 13). That is, only the eigenvalues E„ are observed in an energy 
measurement, whatever the state of the system. The mean of these values is not equal to 
one of the eigenvalues because, as we’re about to discover, individual measurement results 
fluctuate around (E). 

Notice also that the time dependence has vanished from the expectation value of the 
energy of a non-stationary state, (7.87), as it did (§ 7.5) from this quantity for a stationary 
state. This time-independence is a consequence of the structure of Eq. (7.84): each time- 
dependent factor in this equation is multiplied by an orthogonality integral that is equal to 
zero. No such simplification occurs for an arbitrary observable Q, because the integrals that 
multiply time-dependent factors in (Q) (i) contain factors other than the spatial functions. 
Thus, for this state, (x) ( t ) and (p) (£) do depend on time. 

Now back to the energy uncertainty. The other expectation value we need is 


+ L/2 

( E2 )=^3 J [2M^ iE ' ,,, ‘+7Mx)e +IE ^] 

-LIT. 


x n 2 [2Mx)e~ iEll/tl + 7Mx)e~ iE2l/n ] dx. 


(7.88) 


The evaluation of (i? 2 ) proceeds just like that of (E). We work out the effect of 
H 2 on the wave function (7.81) using H 2 = KH, as in Eq. (7.72). There result four 
integrals very much like those of (7.84). As before, two are normalization integrals and two 

15 Such orthogonality integrals are omnipresent in quantum mechanics (Part IV). The general form of 
such an integral is J^_ip* t (x)xljvi(x)dx. It is a general property of the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian 
that for two different spatial functions (i.e., for n ± m ), this integral is zero. 


Sec. 7.6 Superpositions of Stationary States 265 



are orthogonality integrals. And the latter are zero. Working through a simple arithmetic 
calculation, we find 


(E 2 ) = ^(4Ef+49E|) 

= ^ [4E?+ 49(4E,) 2 ] (7.89) 

788 2 
= 53 El ' 

Using this result and (7.87) for { E ), we obtain the uncertainty for the state (7.81), 


A E 




E* = 0.79 Ei. 


(7.90) 


Question 7-12 

Fill in the steps completely and carefully to obtain Eq. (7.90). Understanding this 
simple analysis will make solving later problems involving non-stationary states much 
easier. 

So the energy for this non-stationary state is not sharp. Individual results of an 
ensemble energy measurement fluctuate about (E) = 3.77 E\ with a standard deviation of 
A E = 0.79Ei. This behavior differs strikingly from that of a stationary state like the 
one in Example 7.3. For the latter, all members give the same value, (E) n = E n with no 
fluctuations, and (A E)» = 0. 


General Non-Stationary States 

I included in the non-stationary wave function (7.81) only two constituents, the wave 
functions for the ground and first-excited states. The obvious generalization of this 
example is an infinite superposition, the most general non-stationary state: 


oc 

c n if) n (x)e~ tEnt ^ h 

n=l 


general non-stationary state 


(7.91) 


For the infinite square well, this wave function looks like 

y(x,t) = S c »\/j cos ( n7r ^) e~ iEnt/h 

n=l 

odd 

+ Xl c " \/^ sin ( mr ^ a; ) e~ tEntfh . 

n— 2 ' 

even 


(7.92) 


The coefficients c„, which may be complex, control the mixture of stationary states. 
For the state (7.81) of the infinite square well, these guys are 


Cl 



7 

v/53’ 


C3 = C 4 = . . . = 0. 


266 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 




These numbers are called, quite reasonably, mixture coefficients or expansion coeffi¬ 
cients. 

Let’s look for a moment at the form of the wave function (7.92) at the initial time 

t = 0: 


0 ) 



odcl even 


(7.93) 


Structurally, Eq. (7.93) is very like the Fourier series expansion (4.41) for the initial 
wave function \F(:e, 0). We calculate the Fourier coefficients in a series expansion of a 
function f(x) (§ 4.3) as integrals of sine or cosine functions times the function. Similarly, 
in quantum mechanics, we calculate the expansion coefficients in a non-stationary state 
wave function of the form (7.91) as integrals over the initial state function, to wit: 


c«(0) — J 


ip*(x)^(x, 0 )dx. 


(7.94) 


Because these coefficients are intimately related to the wave function at the initial time , 
I’ve appended to them the argument (0). The parallel between (7.94) and the techniques 
of Fourier analysis is striking and no accident (Chap. 12). 


Deducing the State Function 


Equation (7.94) shows that from the initial wave function we can determine the expansion 
coefficients {c„ (0)} and thence the state function $(a;,i). But in the real world of 
laboratory physics, we often cannot proceed in this fashion. Instead we determine these 
coefficients experimentally— e.g., by measuring the energy of the system in its initial 
state. To show you how this goes, I want to consider a final example. 16 

Example 7.5. Creation of a State Function 

You are in a laboratory. The reigning experimentalists are showing you the results of an 
energy measurement on an ensemble of infinite-square-well systems. These measurements 
unveil the state at t = 0 to be a mixture of the two stationary states with quantum numbers 
n = 2 and n = 6. Further, the data reveals that the relative mixture of these states is 
1 : 5 for n = 2 : n = 6. Your mission: determine the wave function for subsequent times, 
^(a’jf). You know the spatial functions ip n {x) and energies E n in the general expansion 
(7.92). All you need is the coefficients c„(0). 

Translating the experimentalists’ infonnation into quantum mechanics, we first write 
down the form of the initial wave function, 

^(x,0) = c 2 (0)V>2(®) + C6(0)V»6(a;), 
and the ratio of the expansion coefficients, 

c 2 (0) = 1 
c 6 (0) 5' 

Since C6(0) = 5c 2 (0), we can write the initial function (7.95) as 

*(z,0) = c 2 (0)^ 2 (a:) + 5c 2 (0)^6(x) = c 2 (0) [$ 2 {x) + 5^ 6 (a;)] 

16 From such a measurement we can determine only the ratio of the magnitudes of these coefficients— 
not their real and imaginary parts. But we can discover their relative phases via other experiments, thereby 
fully determining the initial state function (to within the usual global phase factor). For more on such matters, 
see Chap. 13. 


(7.95) 

(7.96) 

(7.97) 


Sec. 7.6 Superpositions of Stationary States 267 



All that remains is to evaluate c 2 (0) in (7.97) and to write the resulting function in 
the general form (7.92) for t > 0. But what quantum-mechanical relationship can we use 
to calculate this coefficient? Well, there’s only one property of the wave function 'P(X)O) 
that we haven’t already used. Can you think what it is? 

Right: we haven’t normalized the initial function. The coefficient c 2 (0) provides the 
flexibility we need to enforce the condition 

+ L/2 

yH*(x t 0)V{x,0)dx = J V*{x t 0)V(x, 0)d® = 1. (7.98) 

-L/2 



A little algebra later, we find that this condition is satisfied by c 2 (0) = l/\/26. So the 
initial wave function is 


*(..°) = hMs) + 5V>e(aO] • 


(7.99) 


In trying to generalize an initial wave function such as (7.99) to times t > 0, many 
newcomers to quantum mechanics come to grief. One of their most common mistakes is to 

write the t > 0 wave function as -^=[ip 2 (x) + ^{x)] e~ iEt/h . I hope it’s clear why this 

\/26 

form is grossly in error. If not, please ponder and commit to memory the following: 


WARNING 

You cannot extend the initial state function for a non-stationary state to times t > 0 by 
multiplying by a single factor e~ iEt,h . There is no single value of E that characterizes 
the state, because the energy of the state is not sharp. 


The right way to proceed is indicated by the general form (7.91): we multiply each 
term in the expansion by the corresponding time factor. For the state represented by (7.99) 
at t = 0, we get 

= -J= ^(i)e- i£!,/ * + 5«*)r i8 “ /l1 ] , (7.100) 

where the energies are E„ = n 2 ir 2 h 2 f(2mL 2 ) for n = 2 and n = 6. 


I want to leave you thinking about the similarity between the procedure we used in 
Example 7.5 to determine the wave function for a bound non-stationary state of a particle 
in a box and the one we used in § 4.4 to determine the wave packet for an unbound 
non-stationary state of a free particle. Schematically, these procedures look like 


tf(a,0) ==► A(k) => V{x } t) = j 

A(k)e likx - Ul) dk 

— OO 

__ 


[continuum 
state] ' 


oo 

*M) =» {c„(0)} =*• *0M) = Ec,.(0)V’, t (s)e“ ,£ "‘ /f ‘ 

n 


[bound 

state] 


(7.102) 


268 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 





The similarity between these procedures suggests that A(k) and {c„(0)| play analogous 
roles in the quantum theory of continuum and bound states. Germinating in this com¬ 
parison are the seeds of a powerful generalization of these procedures, as we’ll discover 
in Chap. 12. 


7.7 FINAL THOUGHTS: DO STATIONARY STATES REALLY 
EXIST? 

In this chapter, I’ve introduced the “other” Schrodinger Equation, the TISE 

H^e = Eip E . (7.103) 

The first Schrodinger Equation you met (in Chap. 6) was the TDSE, 

W = €V. (7.104) 

It’s vital that you never lose sight of the difference between these equations and their 
roles in quantum theory. 

The time-dependent Schrodinger Equation (7.104) is a second-order partial differ¬ 
ential equation in space and time variables. We do not see in it a value of the energy 
because in general, we cannot associate a single, well-defined value of this observable 
with a quantum state. Instead, we find the energy operator £. We use this equation to 
study the evolution of any state, whether or not it is stationary. 

The time-independent Schrodinger Equation (7.103) is an eigenvalue equation in 
the position variable x (for a one-dimensional, single-particle system). The eigenvalue 
is E , the value of the (sharp) energy. We use this equation to solve for the spatial 
dependence of a stationary-state wave function = ipE e~ iEt f tl . 

Like many elements of physical theory, stationary states are an idealization. In the 
real world, one can prepare a system, via ensemble measurements, to be in a stationary 
state at an initial time. But the system won’t remain in such a state indefinitely. Only 
a truly isolated system would, in principle, remain in a stationary state for all time-and 
in the real world a system cannot be isolated from all external influences. Even if we 
take great pains to remove from the vicinity of a particle all other objects and sources 
of fields, the particle interacts with the vacuum electromagnetic field that permeates all 
space. Understanding the origin of this field requires knowledge of relativistic quantum 
theory, which is beyond our current expertise. But the important point is that this field 
causes mixing of other stationary states with the initial state. This mixing may induce 
the system to eventually undergo a transition to another state. 

The key word here is “eventually”—in many cases, a microscopic system remains 
in a stationary state long enough for us to perform an experiment. For example, excited 
stationary states of atoms are stable for periods ranging from 10~ 9 to 10~ 2 sec, depending 
on the type of transition the atom eventually undergoes. On the time scale of atomic 
processes, such durations are fairly long. So, provided we’re interested in an event that 
occurs on an atomic time scale, we can safely treat the system as being in a stationary 
state. 

In spite of their slightly idealized nature, stationary states have become the heart 
and soul of quantum mechanical calculations. Their usefulness—and the ease of solution 
of the TISE compared to the TDSE—fully justifies the time we shall spend on them, 
beginning in the next chapter. 


Sec. 7.7 Final Thoughts: Do Stationary States Really Exist? 269 



EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


“Is not my logic absolute? 
Would not a three-year-old child 
of most deficient intellect 
be convinced by it?” 

—Jules de Grandin 
in Salon’s Stepson 
by Seabury Quinn 


The problems in this chapter explore several aspects of stationarity and the properties 
of stationary-state wave functions. In addition, you’ll further your understanding of 
the probability current density, examine a non-stationary “sloshing” state, and discover 
how to use the simple infinite square well to approximate a very complicated organic 
molecule. 


Exercises 


7.1 Momentum Uncertainties — The Easy Way 

Derive a general expression for the momentum uncertainty (Ap)„ for an arbitrary stationary 
state of a particle in an infinite square well of width L. 

Hint: Consider carefully the way in which p appears in the expression for the Hamiltonian 
operator of this system. You should have to do very little work to get the right answer. 


Problems 

7.1 Interesting Properties of Stationary-State Functions 

Like all wave functions, a stationary-state wave function is arbitrary to within a global phase 
factor e ,f> , where 8 is a real constant (see § 3.5). 

[a] Prove that with no loss of generality, we can always choose 6 so that the spatial functions 
iPe{x) are real. 

[b] Prove that the probability current density for any bound stationary state is zero. 

7.2 The Probability Current Density for a Sloshing State 

In Pblm. 3.2 we studied a non-stationary state of the infinite square well. The wave function 
for this state is a linear combination of ^i(a;,f) and ’I ' 2 {x,t) of Eqs. (7.58): 


= ~^= |^i(z,f) + ^2 (x,t) 


(7.2.1) 


[a] Derive an expression for the probability current density j(x,t) at the midpoint of the 
well (x = 0). 

[b] Find the (time-dependent) probability that a particle in an ensemble of systems in this 
state will be found in a position measurement at time t to be in the left half of the box. 

[c] Verify that the rate at which probability leaves the left half of the box is equal to j{ 0, t). 
Provide a physical explanation of this result, basing your discussion on the inteipretation 
of the probability current density. 

7.3 The Probability Current Density for the Free Particle 

In Pblm. 5.3, we wrote a general form for a free-particle wave packet at time t = 0, i.e., 

»(i,0) = f(x)e‘"° x/ ''. (7.3.1) 


Recall that the function f(x) was specified to be real. Suppose this function is centered on 
the origin (x = 0) and is zero outside the region [—L/2,+L/2]. 


270 Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



[a] Derive an expression for j(x, 0) for a state that is represented by a wave packet of this 
fonn. 

[b] Prove that for such a state 

[ j(x,0)dx=^. (7.3.2) 

i-oo m 

Discuss carefully the physical significance of this result. 

[c] Briefly discuss how you would qualitatively expect j{x,t) to change with time at two 
positions: xi < -L/ 2, and x 2 » +L/2. 

7.4 Properties of the Infinite Square Well 

In § 7.4 we solved the TISE for a particle that is confined to a one-dimensional infinite potential 
well of width L. In exercises and problems earlier in this book, we have investigated several 
properties of this system. In this problem, we’ll gather together and generalize some of these 
properties. 

[a] Derive a general expression for the position uncertainty (Arc),, for the n th stationary 
state of this system. Calculate (Ax)„ for n = 1, 2, 3, and 4. Discuss briefly the 
physical significance of the variation of the position uncertainty as n increases. 

[b] Repeat part (a) for the momentum uncertainly (Ap)„. 

[c] Evaluate (T) n for the n th stationary state. 

7.5 An Application of the Infinite Square Well 

A surprising number of physical systems can be modelled by the infinite square well of § 7.4. 
For instance, the hexatriene molecule is a fairly complicated organic system. Some of the 
electrons in this molecule (the six “rr electrons”) are delocalized (/.£., are free to move about 
inside the molecule). We can model this system by treating the electrons as if they were in 
an infinite potential well with walls located a distance of one-half the bond length from each 
of the terminal carbon nuclei, as shown in the Fig. 7.5.1. Using such a model, the width of 
the box turns out to be L = 7.3 A. 


H < H \ V ! 

I 


Figure 7.5.1 A ludicrously simple model 
of a very complicated organic molecule. 


[a] Evaluate the first four energy levels of an electron in the (model) hexatriene molecule. 
Express your answers in joules and in eV. 

As we’ll learn in Volume II, electrons in many-electron systems are subject to some unusual 
constraints. For example, if a one-dimensional system contains more than two electrons, then 
only two electrons can have the same energy. We describe this situation rather colorfully, 
by saying that two electrons with the same energy “occupy the same energy level.” So in 
a multi-electron one-dimensional “atom,” no more than two electrons can occupy the same 
energy level. (This is the essence of The Pauli Exclusion Principle.) Applying this principle 
to the hexatriene molecule, we find that the ground state of this system is the state in which 
the lowest three energy levels are completely “filled,” each with two electrons per level. 

[b] Now, suppose we irradiate a hexatriene molecule in its ground state with radiation of just 
the right wavelength to induce a transition of one electron from the n = 3 to the n = 4 
energy level. Calculate the wavelength (in angstroms) of the photon that is absorbed 
when this transition occurs. The experimentally observed absorption band occurs at 
A = 2580 A. Compare your answer to the observed wavelength and decide whether the 
infinite square well is a good model of this system. 


Exercises and Problems 271 



7.6 Probability Flux and Standing Waves 

In Example 7.1 we saw that the Hamiltonian eigenfunction for a free particle can be written 
either in terms of complex travelling waves [Eq. (7.34)] or real standing waves [such as 
Eqs. (7.35)]. In solving bound-state problems, the standing-wave solutions are by far the 
more convenient choice. The general form of the spatial function for a free particle with 
energy E in tenns of standing waves is 

i{)e(x) = A sin kx + B cos kx, (7.6.1) 


where 


k = 


V2mE 

h 


(7-6.2) 


and A and B are arbitrary constants. 

[a] Suppose (for simplicity) that B = 0. Evaluate and sketch the probability density for 
the resulting state of the free particle. Hew does your result differ from the position 
probability of a classical free particle? 

[b] Evaluate the probability current density for a state ^{x, t) with spatial function given 
by Eq. (7.6.1) with B = 0. Provide a physical explanation for your result. 

7.7 The Infinite Square Well in the “Classical Limit” 

The stationary-state energies of the particle in a box are given by Eq. (7.56). Consider two 
adjacent energy levels, with quantum numbers n and n + 1. 

[a] Derive an expression for the fractional difference in energy between these levels: 

where 

[b] Discuss the behavior of your result in the limit n —* oo. Why is this limit called the 
“classical limit”? 


272 


Chap. 7 Simplifying Matters 



CHAPTER 8 


States of a Particle in One 

Dimension I 

Mainly Piecewise-Constant 
Potentials 

8.1 What Do One-Dimensional Piecewise-Constant Potentials 
Have to Do with the Real World? 

8.2 A Duplicity of States: Bound versus Unbound States 
* 8.3 Particles in Collision: An Introduction to Quantum 

Scattering 

8.4 Solving the TISE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 

8.5 The Interpretation of Continuum-State Eigenfunctions 

8.6 Tunnelling for Fun and Profit 

8.7 Bound States of the Finite Square Well 

8.8 The Finite Square Well: The Answers 

8.9 Final Thoughts—and an Application 



‘Do you not think that there are things 

which you cannot understand, 

and yet which are; 

that some people see things 

that others cannot?’ 

—Dr. Van Helsing 
in Dracula 
by Bram Stoker 


Enough abstract theory; it’s time to solve problems. In Part II, while learning the 
rudiments of quantum physics, we examined two extremely simple systems: the free 
particle (Chap. 4 and § 6.6-6.7) and the particle in a box (Chap. 7). Each of these 
systems is an idealization that we can use to model real systems. For example, we can 
approximate a state of particles in a low-intensity beam by a state of the free particle, 
and a state of conduction electrons in a metallic solid by a state of an electron in an 
infinite square well. 

The free particle was the focus of Chaps. 4 and 6. In Chap. 4, we deduced the 
form of the free-particle wave function: a wave packet. Then, in Chap. 6, we explored 
the motion of a free particle—the evolution of this wave function—and discovered that 
its probability density moves and spreads. Since such a particle is unconfined, its states 
are unbound. 

The particle in a box was the centerpiece of Chap. 7. In this system, the “walls” 
of the infinite square well at x = ±L/2 constrain the particle’s motion. Whether in 
a stationary or a non-stationary state, it cannot escape from the well, from the interval 
[—L/2 < x < L/2\. Its states are bound. 

But these examples are extreme idealizations. Potentials in the real world are 
neither zero everywhere nor infinite anywhere. And typically, realistic potentials have 
both bound states (like those of the particle in a box) and unbound states (like those 
of the free particle). (In the parlance of quantum physics, unbound states are called 
continuum states or scattering states.) In this chapter and the next, we shall begin the 
study of the general properties of these two classes of quantum states. 

You will notice almost immediately that in these chapters we shift gears, emphasiz¬ 
ing problem-solving strategies and real-world applications rather than historical sidelights 
and theoretical formulations. (Enthusiasts of theory have only to wait for Part IV, where 
we return to the formalism of quantum mechanics.) Nevertheless, our focus will remain 
on such physical questions as what kinds of quantum states are found in nature, how can 
we understand their physical properties, and what do these properties tell us about the 
microworld? 

Our quest for answers to these questions will lead us through a general discussion 
of the nature of bound and continuum states (§ 8.2), a close look at continuum states 
(§ 8.3), and a step-by-step analysis of how to solve the Schrodinger Equation for a special, 
restricted class of potentials: those that are piecewise constant (§ 8.4-8.5). (We’ll master 
the more challenging case of a continuous potential in Chap. 9.) We then launch into 
two famous examples: tunnelling through a potential barrier (§ 8.6) and bound states 
of a finite square well (§ 8.7 and 8.8). We close (§ 8.9) with a glimpse at a research 
problem in which piecewise-constant models find application. 


274 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



8.1 WHAT DO ONE-DIMENSIONAL PIECEWISE-CONSTANT 
POTENTIALS HAVE TO DO WITH THE REAL WORLD? 

In the next few chapters we’II study in detail several one-dimensional single-particle 
systems. But real physical systems are, of course, three-dimensional: their state functions 
depend on three spatial variables ( e.g ., the Cartesian coordinates x, y , and z) and must 
satisfy the three-dimensional Schrodinger Equation. So you may be wondering: are the 
one-dimensional wells and barriers of these chapters merely hyped-up examples or are 
they relevant? To find out, let’s look briefly at three-dimensional quantum mechanics. 

The problem posed by a three-dimensional single-particle system is by now famil¬ 
iar. If the system is conservative, its potential is independent of time. So its Hamiltonian 
(in Cartesian coordinates) is 


n = -f 

2 m 


d 2 a 2 
dx 2 + dy 2 + 


and its wave functions satisfy the TDSE 
2m 


d 2 d 2 d 2 , 

dx 2 + dy 2 + 'dz 2 J +K(x, 2 /, 2 ) 


3 2 \ 

3^2 ) +V(x,V*z), ( 8 . 1 ) 

'H{x,y,z,t) = ih—'&(x,y,z,t). (8.2) 


We can simplify Eq. (8.2) via the technique of separation of variables , just as we did 
the one-dimensional TDSE in § 7.1, because the separation of space and time does not 
depend on the dimensionality of the potential. The resulting separable solutions of (8.2) 
are products of a time factor e ~ iEi and a spatial factor. The latter is the Hamiltonian 
eigenfunction, the solution of the three-dimensional TISE 


^ E (x,y, z) 

' h 2 / d 2 d 2 d 2 \ 

2m + dy 2 ^ dz 2 ) 


+ V{x,y,z) 


*pE(x,y,z) 


Eip E (x i y,z). 


(8.3) 


For many three-dimensional systems we can reduce (8.3) to one (or more) one¬ 
dimensional equations. Under what physical conditions might such a simplification be 
possible? Well, suppose the forces on the particle act in only one dimension. For 
example, imagine a classical system that consists of two billiard balls connected by a 
spring whose force constant is so large that gravity is negligible. The restoring forces on 
these balls acts along their line of centers, which implicitly defines a single dimension. 
[The quantum-mechanical counterpart of this example is the vibration of two nuclei in a 
diatomic molecule (§ 9.6).] This system illustrates the point that if the forces on a particle 
are uni-directional, then the potential energy that derives from these forces depends on 
only one spatial variable. Thus, if F = Fe x ,X\\tnV = V{x). This happy circumstance 
enables us to dramatically simplify the TISE (8.3). 

We effect this simplification by again invoking separation of variables. Just as 
in Chap. 7 we separated the t dependence of a (stationary-state) wave function ^(x,f) 
from its x dependence, now we can separate the x dependence of the three-dimensional 
Hamiltonian eigenfunction ^ E {x,y,z) from its y and z dependence. The details of this 
marvelous simplification will be left for Part V; but here’s a glimpse ahead. 


Separation of Variables in the Three-Dimensional TISE 


If the potential in Eq. (8.3) depends only on x, then there exist three-dimensional eigen¬ 
functions of Ti that are products of three one-dimensional functions , each of which is 


Sec. 8.1 Piecewise-Constant Potentials and the Real World 275 



associated with a constant energy: e.g ., WeI{ x ) with E x . These separated Hamiltonian 
eigenfunctions look like 

fpE(x,y } z) = (8 - 4) 

Each factor in this product eigenfunction depends on a single variable and satisfies a 
TISE in that variable. For instance, the ^-dependent function in Eq. (8.4) satisfies the 
one-dimensional TISE 

’/4* l w=< 8 - 5 > 

But what about the y- and ^-dependent factors in (8.4)? Well, by hypothesis the 
forces act only in the x direction, so the particle’s motion in the y and z directions is that 
of a free particle. Therefore, the corresponding factors in the Hamiltonian eigenfunction, 
ip^\y) and are one-dimensional free-particle wave packets. 

So we can reduce the determination of the stationary states of a three-dimen¬ 
sional system with uni-directional forces to the problem of solving a one-dimensional 
Schrodinger Equation. 1 


( 8 . 6 ) 

+ 

The simple separation (8.4) is not the only (or the most common) way to reduce 
the number of variables in the Schrodinger Equation. But other methods must wait for 
Part V. 

Question 8-1 

Fill in the steps leading from Eq. (8.4) to (8.5) and thereby discover the relationship between 
the total energy of the particle, E, and the three constants E x , E y , and E z introduced in 
Eq. (8.4). 

On Piecewise-Constant Potentials 

In this chapter we’ll consider conservative, one-dimensional single-particle systems whose 
potentials are piecewise constant. A piecewise-constant potential is one that is constant 
for all values of x except at a finite number of discontinuities—points where it changes 
from one constant value to another. You can see a simple piecewise-constant potential 
in Fig. 8.1c, where the finite square well (which we’ll come to know and love in § 8.7) 
is on display. 

Novice quantum mechanics are sometimes seduced by this wonderful simplification into thinking that 
the state functions for such a system depend only on a single spatial variable. Not true. Equation (8.4) shows 
us that even if the potential depends only on .t, the wave functions depend on x and y and 2 . The simplification 
is that these dependences are those of a free particle. 





276 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 






Of course, real potentials are continuous, finite functions. But many widely-used 
model potentials are discontinuous at one or more points in space (see § 8.9). Provided 
the potential we’re modeling changes rapidly only in one or more very small regions of 
space, such a model may be an accurate approximation. 




Model V(x) 


-—-►- Figure 8.1 From impulsive forces to 

x piece wise-constant model potential. 

- (a) Uni-directional forces that change only 

in two very narrow regions, where they are 
impulsive, (b) The continuous potential 
energy corresponding to these forces, (c) A 
reliable model of the potential in (b), the 
(c) TISE of which we’ll solve in § 8.7. 


Aside: More on the Validity of Piecewise-Constant Models. To keep piecewise- 
constant potentials in perspective, it’s important to understand the particular physical 
conditions under which a real potential can be modeled accurately by a piecewise- 
constant function. The key to such insight is the forces that act in the system. The 
force in Fig. 8.1a is uni-directional and constant everywhere except in two small 
regions of size 6x centered at x = a and at x = b. In these regions, the force is 
impulsive. The resulting potential in Fig. 8.1b is constant everywhere except in these 
regions, where it changes abruptly. This potential is a prime candidate for modeling 
by a piecewise-constant approximation. 

But the mere fact that the changes in V(a;) are abrupt does not mean that 
the model in Fig. 8.1c is a good approximation for all states. For example, the 
stationary states of the finite square well in this figure accurately approximate states 
of the potential in Fig. 8.1b only if the de Broglie wavelength of the particle is large 
compared to 6x. This wavelength, A, is the characteristic dimension of the state. If 


Sec. 8.1 Piecewise-Constant Potentials and the Real World 277 



6x is a small fraction of this dimension, then the details of how the potential changes 
in this region are irrelevant. To summarize this important guideline: 


Rule 

An abrupt change in a potential can be replaced by a discontinuous change 
provided the de Broglie wavelength of the particle is large compared to the 
size 8x of the region where the change occurs: A » 6x. 


Question 8-2 

Drawing on your understanding of classical wave phenomena (e.g., a water 
wave passing through the entrance to a harbor), explain why a piecewise- 
constant model is an accurate approximation if 6x is much smaller than A. 


Question 8-3 

The particle-in-a-box is a common model of a system whose (continuous) 
potential corresponds to impulsive forces. As I remarked in Chap. 7, a good 
example of such a system is a conduction electron in a (solid) metal. [The forces 
on such an electron near the surface of the solid are (to a good approximation) 
impulsive.] Is this model likely to be a better approximation for a stationary 
state with a very high or a very low energy El 


Actually, one can use a piecewise-constant model even if the potential be¬ 
ing modeled is continuous. For example, Fig. 8.2 shows a famous potential from 
molecular physics called the Morse Potential. 2 This potential pertains to diatomic 
molecules, such as H 2 or N 2 (i.e., molecules with two nuclei): it is an approximate 
representation of the potential energy (due to the molecular electrons) in which these 
nuclei vibrate about their equilibrium separation. One way to solve the TISE for the 
Morse potential is to approximate it by a succession of constant “steps,” as shown 
in the figure. Such a piecewise-constant model is called a quadrature approxima¬ 
tion to V(x). (In practice, we can more simply approximate the Morse potential by 
another continuous function, the simple-harmonic-oscillator potential of Chap. 9.) 

In any case, if we can use a piecewise-constant potential, we are in luck, for this 
model renders the solution of the TISE comparatively trivial. As we’ll see in § 8.4, 
we can simply write down the form of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction in each of the 
regions where V(x) is constant. Then we “hook” these pieces together (at the points of 
discontinuity) using a straightforward, well-defined procedure. 

Alas, life is rarely so simple. Many important and interesting potentials cannot be 
modeled accurately by a piecewise-constant approximation. And even if such a model is a 
good approximation for some states, it may be lousy for others. So we must augment our 
bag of problem-solving tricks with methods for subduing continuous potentials—which 
will come center stage in Chap. 9. 


2 The Morse potential was named after the man who dreamed it up, Philip Morse. You can find an 
account of how Morse arrived at the potential that bears his name by reading his delightful autobiography, In 
at the Beginnings: A Physicist’s Life (Cambridge, Mass., M.l.T Press, 1977). 


278 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




Figure 8.2 The Morse potential, 
an accurate model of the electronic 
potential of a diatomic molecule. 

With x denoting the separation of the 
nuclei, the form of this potential is 
V(x) = D e [ 1 - e - a (s-*ft)J 2 , where 
D e and a are parameters and x e is the 
position of the minimum of the Morse well. 


8.2 A DUPLICITY OF STATES: BOUND VERSUS UNBOUND 
STATES 

Because no forces confine a free particle, it can roam throughout space. In quantum 
mechanics, this behavior is mirrored in the particle’s wave functions. We learned in 
Chap. 6 that no matter where we look for a free particle, we might find it. That is, since 
such a particle is unconfined, the probability of detecting it at any location x could, at 
some time, be non-zero. That’s why we call the states of a free particle unbound states. 

A quite different situation confronts a particle in an infinite square well: because 
it is confined by the forces represented by the potential, the particle is trapped. At any 
time, the probability of detecting the particle at a position outside the well is zero. The 
states of a confined particle are, sensibly, called bound states. 

In essence, the differences between bound and unbound states follow from their 
probability densities at very large values of |a;|. To figure out whether a state is bound, 
we just ask: is the probability of finding the particle at a very large value of x ever 
non-zero? If not, then the particle is in a bound state. 3 

We can express these differences mathematically via the following conditions: 



|^(a; } f)| 2 - > 0 at all times t 

x —>±oo 


[bound state] 


(8.7) 



|^(x,f)| 2 -> 0 at any particular time t 

[unbound state] (8.8) 


x —*±oc 



3 In one-dimensional scattering theory, the region a’ —» ±oo is called the asymptotic region. In three- 
dimensional scattering theory, the asymptotic region is defined in terms of the radial coordinate (of spherical 
coordinates r, 0, and y>): r —» oo. 


Sec. 8.2 A Duplicity of States: Bound versus Unbound States 279 






Equation (8.8) is just a mathematical statement of an old friend: the spatial localization 
of an unbound wave packet (/>., the normalization condition). Note, by the way, that 
this condition is not limited to free particles; unbound states of a system may exist even 
if V(x) ^ 0. 

Be sure you appreciate the difference between the conditions (8.7) and (8.8). The 
clue is in the qualifiers, “at all times” for bound states versus “at any particular time” 
for unbound states. The wave function of an unbound state is spatially localized at any 
particular time; but the wave function of a bound state is localized in the same region of 
space (the vicinity of the potential) at all times. 

Question 8-4 

Write Eqs. (8.7) and (8.8) as boundary conditions on the Hamiltonian eigenfunction i)> e{x ). 


Another important difference between a bound state and an unbound state is that the 
energy of a bound state is quantized, but the energy of an unbound state is not. [The 
boundary condition (8.7) leads to energy quantization for any bound stationary state (see, 
for example, the infinite square well in Chap. 7); the condition (8.8), however, has no 
such consequences.] Thus an energy measurement on an ensemble of particles in a bound 
state will yield only energies drawn from a discrete list, the eigenvalues: E\, E 2 , E 3 ,... 
of the Hamiltonian. In contrast, an energy measurement on an ensemble in an unbound 
state may yield any of a “continuum” of values. That is why unbound states are called 
continuum states. 

What bound and continuum states have in common is, of course, the time-dependent 
Schrodinger equation. Both types of wave functions satisfy 


h 2 & * 

-2^W +V{X) 




(8.9) 


Aside: Review. Before looking more closely at the properties of bound and contin¬ 
uum states, let’s summarize their basic physics: 

1. A particle in a bound state is confined by its potential. Although there may be 
a finite probability of detecting the particle far from the region of the potential, 
that probability dies to zero as x —* ± 00 . As a consequence of these boundary 
conditions, the energies of stationary bound states are quantized. 

2. A particle in a continuum state is unconfined. Although its state function is 
affected by the potential, the particle can escape the confines of that potential. 
Therefore it is possible to detect the particle in the asymptotic region. 

To complement this summary, I’ve gathered together in Table 8.1 the properties of 
bound and continuum states we deduced in earlier chapters. 


TABLE 8.1 BOUND VS. CONTINUUM STATES 



Bound State 

Continuum State 

energies 

E n are quantized 

E > 0 are not quantized 

degeneracy 
stationary-state 
spatial function 
boundary conditions 

general state function 

Ej\ <irc non-degenerate 
tf(x,0 = ^n(x)e~ iE « t l h 
^„(x) is normalizable 

4>n(x) -♦ 0 

x —*±oo 

2“ CnMx)e- iEnt/h 

^(x.t) = tl)E(x)e~ lEt l h 
iPe(x) is not normalizable 
|V , e(®)| < 00 (all x) 


280 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



Bound and Continuum States Together 


In one important respect, the zero potential of a free particle, which supports only contin¬ 
uum states, and the infinite square well, which supports only bound states, are anomalous. 
Most microscopic systems support both bound and continuum states. In Fig. 8.3a, I’ve 
sketched a typical (continuous) potential and its continuum and bound-state energies. 
The collection of all energies (bound and continuum) of a system is called its spectrum. 




E = 0 


(b) 

Figure 8.3 (a) A prototype of a one-dimensional finite-range potential. The dotted 
lines show the bound stationary-state energies, which in (b) are shown on an energy- 
level diagram. Above the x axis is the continuum of energies available to unbound 
states. 


The potential in Fig. 8.3a is one of an important class of finite-range potentials. 
This name is a bit misleading; it doesn’t really mean that the range of the potential is 
finite— i.e., it doesn’t imply that there exists a value of x, say x = a, such that V = 0 
for x > a. In quantum physics, a finite-range potential is one that dies to zero as the 
spatial coordinate approaches infinity: 

V(.t) -» 0 finite-range potential (8.10) 

x—*±oo 

The potential in Fig. 8.3 satisfies this condition, because V(x) is vanishingly small for 
x xi and x » x^. We’ve discussed the general properties of the bound and continuum 
states supported by such a potential, but it’s worth taking a minute to review the kinds 
of bound states such a potential might support. 

Sec. 8.2 A Duplicity of States: Bound versus Unbound States 281 





Aside: The Classical Connection. If the Hamiltonian of the microscopic system 
we’re studying has a classical counterpart, then we can determine if the system sup¬ 
ports bound states, continuum states, or both. (In many cases, we can figure out the 
classical counterpart of the quantum-mechanical Hamiltonian by simply making the 
masses macroscopic.) If there exist bound orbits of the classical Hamiltonian, then 
bound states of the corresponding quantum-mechanical Hamiltonian exist. 4 

Question 8-5 

(a) Deduce whether each of the following systems supports bound states, continuum states, 
or both, justifying your answer with physical arguments: an oscillator with potential 
V(r) = kr 2 j 2; a microscopic planet moving according to the Kepler potential V(r) = —nfr 
(where k is a constant), (b) Describe the spectrum (discrete? continuous? both?) of these 
systems. 

As we know from Part II, bound states come in two flavors: stationary and non¬ 
stationary. A stationary state is characterized by a sharp (quantized) energy, so the 
uncertainty A E is zero (see the dotted lines in Fig. 8.3.) A stationary-state wave function 
is separable in space and time, and the corresponding probability density is independent 
of time. 

But a non-stationary state must be represented by a wave packet, which is not 
separable. The probability density of such a state changes with time. (Recall, for ex¬ 
ample, the non-stationary state of the infinite square well of § 7.6.) And the energy 
of a non-stationary state is not sharp, so A E > 0 at any time. But, like a station¬ 
ary bound state, a non-stationary bound state is forever localized in the vicinity of the 
potential. 

To illustrate the nature of the states of some more-or-less realistic one-dimensional 
finite range potentials, consider Fig. 8.4. The potential in Fig. 8.4a arises from the 
Coulomb forces between two oppositely-charged particles, such as the electron and proton 
in a hydrogen atom. In Volume II, we’ll find that this potential supports an infinite 
number of bound states, as well as a continuum of unbound states. An electron in a 
continuum state of this potential is one that has been ionized— i.e., it is localized an 
“infinite distance” from the proton, having left behind a bare, positively-charged proton.) 
By contrast, the purely repulsive potential in Fig. 8.4b, which resembles the interaction 
potential of atoms in a molecule whose electrons are in an excited state, supports no 
bound states. Indeed, there are no stationary states of this system. Finally, the potential 
in Fig. 8.4c represents an alpha particle (He ++ ) in the nucleus of a helium atom. This 
potential supports a finite number of stationary bound states and an infinite number of 
continuum states. 

Most practicing physicists study both bound and continuum states. But some spe¬ 
cialists emphasize one or the other type: spectroscopists study principally bound states, 
and scattering theorists ( e.g ., your author) concentrate on continuum states. The kinds of 
questions these scientists ask and the way they seek answers are fundamentally differ¬ 
ent. These differences mirror the contrasts between the physics of bound and unbound 
states. For example, a typical calculation by a molecular scattering theorist might entail 
determining the probability that an atom colliding with a molecule will be scattered in 
a particular direction. A typical problem for a molecular structure theorist, on the other 


4 You remember orbits of classical particles from freshman physics, don’t you? If not, you might want 
to review, say, Chap. 8 of Classical Dynamics of Particles and Systems, 2nd ed. by Jerry B. Marion (New 
York: Academic Press, 1970). 


282 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



V(r)i 


V(r) 





(0 

Figure 8.4 A sampler of one-dimensional model potentials, (a) The Coulomb potential 
between an electron and a proton, (b) A purely repulsive potential, patterned after a 
repulsive state of the CH molecule, (c) A potential well formed by nuclear and Coulomb 
forces that traps an alpha particle inside a Helium nucleus. [See Chap. 4 of Elements of 
Nuclear Physics by W. E. Meyerhoff (New York, McGraw-Hill, 1967).] The process of 
alpha decay proceeds via tunnelling (§ 8.6). 


hand, might entail calculating the stationary-state energies of an electron in a molecule. 
The experimentalists across the hall might be determining scattering data by colliding a 
beam of atoms into a beam of molecules or by measuring structural information, such as 
bound-state energies, using the techniques of spectroscopy: e.g ., measuring the energy 
of photons emitted when a hydrogen molecule undergoes a transition between stationary 
states. 

In this chapter we shall embrace both worlds, examining bound and continuum 
states (for rather simple systems). For future reference, then, let’s state our goals: 

Goals 

1. For the Study of Bound States: Solve the TISE for the stationary-state energies 
and wave functions—the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian—by 
imposing the boundary conditions appropriate to a bound state. 

2. For the Study of Continuum States; Use the Schrodinger Equation to calculate 
the probability that a particle of known (but uncertain) energy will (at large times 
t) be found at a large positive value of x or at a large negative value of x. 

Sec. 8.2 A Duplicity of States: Bound versus Unbound States 283 



*8.3 PARTICLES IN COLLISION: AN INTRODUCTION TO 
QUANTUM SCATTERING 


There is reason that all things 

are as they are, 

and did you see with my eyes 

and know with my knowledge, 

you would perhaps better understand. 

—Count Dracula 
in Dracula 
by Bram Stoker 


When a microscopic particle is scattered by a microscopic target, the particle’s linear 
momentum (and other properties, such as energy) may be changed. In quantum (as in 
classical) physics, the complicated interaction of a projectile and a target is represented 
by a continuous potential energy. In this section, we’ll model this interaction (for a 
collision in one dimension) by a piecewise-constant potential V(x ). 5 

By contrast to a quantum collision, let’s ponder a classical collision. In particular, 
let’s model the projectile-target interaction by the barrier in Fig. 8.5a. Suppose a macro¬ 
scopic particle travels toward the target in the direction of positive x with a well-defined 
energy E. The outcome of the ensuing encounter depends on whether this energy is 
less than or greater than the barrier height Vo- If E < Vo (e.g., E\ in Fig. 8.5a), the 
particle has insufficient kinetic energy to “scale” the barrier and is repelled—we say it 
is reflected. So after such a collision, the particle is travelling backward (in the -x 
direction) with the same energy, E. In this elastic collision, only the direction of the 
projectile’s linear momentum is changed. If, on the other hand, E > V 0 (e.g., E 2 in 
Fig. 8.5a), the particle passes through the region where V ^ 0—we say it is transmit¬ 
ted. Its speed is reduced only while it is in the interval [—L/2 < x < L/ 2], so after the 
collision, the particle is travelling forward (in the +x direction) with energy E. Thus, 
in a classical collision there are two mutually-exclusive outcomes: either the projectile 
is reflected (if E < V 0 ) or it is transmitted (if E > Vo). 

But in a quantum collision, possibilities abound. 6 In fact (§ 8.6), regardless of the 
proximity of E to V 0 , both reflection and transmission are possible. Even if the mean 
energy of the projectile is significantly less than the barrier height, the particle may 
“penetrate (tunnel through) the barrier,” appearing after the collision at a large positive 
value of x. And even if its mean energy is much greater than Vo, the particle may be 
reflected, appearing at a large negative value of x. Of these two phenomena, perhaps the 
most remarkable is tunnelling; we’ll explore this quintessential quantal marvel in § 8.6. 


5 This section contains a qualitative justification for using continuum stationary states (e.g., pure mo¬ 
mentum functions) in the study of collisions. This justification is preceded by a time-dependent description of 
a quantum mechanical collision that you may want to skip. But if you do so, please review § 6.9 (especially 
Example 6.6) before proceeding to the next section. 

°The energy of a microscopic projectile in an unbound state cannot be sharp. In Fig. 8.5b I’ve 
acknowledged this fact by a fuzzy blur around the energies E\ < Vo and E 2 > Vq. So E\ and E 2 represent 
the mean energies (the expectation values) of the projectile in quantum states } ifi(x,t) and '$> 2 (x,t), for both 
of which AE > 0. 


284 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



V(x) 

*2 

V n 







Transmitted 

— 



Reflected 

__ 


-►- 


2 

(a) 



Figure 8.5 (a). A barrier potential of 
width L that represents the interaction 
of a macroscopic particle and a target 
in a classical collision, (b). The 
same for a microscopic particle of 
uncertain energy incident from the left 
on a microscopic target. Note that 

£ 1 = <£> = (tf 1 (:M)|W|*i(:M)) 

and similarly for E 2 . 


A Microscopic Collision in a Macroscopic Laboratory 

In Fig. 8.6a you’ll find a (very) simple schematic of an experiment to study quantum 
collisions. This apparatus consists of a source, a target, and a detector. To be specific, 
suppose we want to study the scattering of electrons from a species of atom. As a source 
we would use an electron gun, like the one in the double-slit experiment (Chap. 2). This 
device produces a beam of nearly monoenergetic electrons of sufficiently low density that 
(to a good approximation) the particles in the beam do not interact with one another. The 
target in our experiment might be a bottle containing a gas of atoms, all of which (we’ll 
assume) are in the same quantum state. 7 Finally, the detector, which is located far from 
the source and the target, is any device that can measure the number of electrons scattered 
at a particular angle and their energies. (One such device is an electron multiplier.) 

In the experiment, we measure (a) properties of the projectiles in the beam that 
is emitted by the source; and (b) properties of the scattered particles that arrive at the 
detector. By so doing, we can investigate the structure and physical properties of the 
target and the nature of the interaction of microscopic particles. From such experiments 
has come much of our knowledge of the nature of matter—not to mention reassuring 
evidence that quantum mechanics is valid. 

The Wave-Packet Description of a Microscopic Collision 

To predict, confirm, or understand the results of a quantum collision experiment, we must 
calculate the probability that after the collision we would detect a (scattered) particle in 
the asymptotic region, where the detector is. Initially, all we know about the particle is 
its state function before the collision, #(r,£). 

7 In practice, conditions like the temperature of the apparatus determine the distribution of states of the 
atoms in the gas. Another complication is the possibility of multiple collisions ; e.g., a projectile bounces off 
an atom only to collide with one or more additional atoms before it leaves the target region. 


Sec. 8.3 Particles in Collision: An Introduction to Quantum Scattering 285 



Detector 


Source 



"I 


Af. 


L_J 

Target 

(a) 



packet 

(b) 

Figure 8.6 (a) An incredibly simplified idealization of a scattering experiment. Such 
experiments are described using the spherical coordinates shown in (b) 

Let’s denote the duration of the collision by the time interval A t and suppose that 
this interval is centered around the collision time t co \\• So the particle leaves the source 
at t 0 *C < C oU and is detected at t,i > < C oii- 8 

Now, collisions are intrinsically time-dependent phenomena. So the most di¬ 
rect way to calculate the probabilities we need would be to solve the time-dependent 
Schrodinger equation for the wave packet that represents the state of the projectiles. We 
would initialize this equation with the function that describes the (known) state of the 
projectile at the initial time t 0 , when the particle is localized in the vicinity of the source. 
We would then solve the TDSE for the state function at some time t » t co \\ and from 
the solution, evaluate the probability density for various locations of the detector. 

8 Ideally, we’d define the beginning of the interval At as “the time when the collision begins”— i.e., the 
time at which the particle is sufficiently near the region of non-zero potential that its wave function begins to 
deviate from that of a free particle. And we’d define the end of the interval as the time at which the particle is 
sufficiently far from the potential that its wave function is altered no further. Unfortunately, this unambiguous 
definition becomes muddled if, as is often the case, the range of the potential V'(r) is not finite. A common 
instance of this irritating behavior is a potential that, as r —* oo, dies to zero as a power of r. The preeminent 
example is the Coulomb potential, which dies to zero as 1/r. We shall leave such troublesome ambiguities to 
more advanced treatments of quantum collisions. (See, for example, the excellent presentation in Chap. 2 of 
Introduction to the Quantum Theory of Scattering by L. S. Rodberg and R. M. Thaler (New York: Academic 
Press, 1967). For a very nice introduction at a lower level, see the qualitative discussion in § 9-11 of An 
Introduction to Quantum Physics by A. P. French and E. F. Taylor (New York: W. W. Norton, 1978). Come 
to think of it, all of Chap. 9 of this fine text would serve as useful supplementary reading for this chapter. You 
should also peruse the following papers, which supplement the discussions in this section: H. Eberly, Amer. 
Jour. Phys. 33, 771 (1965); A. N. Kamal, ibid., 46 (1984); and I. Galbraith, Y. S. Ching, and E. Abraham, 
ibid., 60 (1984).) 


286 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 





This plan of attack sounds fine. But it leads to severe mathematical complications. 
In fact, these difficulties are so severe that we can’t solve the TDSE except for very 
simple problems. Even for such a problem, the algebraic details of the solution would 
take us far astray. So here I want to show you the qualitative solution of one such 
problem: scattering by the potential barrier in Fig. 8.5b. 

Suppose that before the collision, the particles in the incident beam are in a state that 
can be represented by a Gaussian wave packet (see Chaps. 4 and 6). For convenience, 
let’s denote the initial time (which is some t <C £ C oii) by £o = 0- To conform to the 
experimental situation, the center of the initial wave packet, the expectation value (a;)(0), 
is at a large negative value of x near the source (see Fig. 8.7a). To ensure that the particle 
is travelling to the right (toward the target), the mean momentum of the initial packet 
must be positive. (In fact, let’s choose (p) (0) > y/2mV 0 .) Finally, to ensure that 
the beam is nearly monochromatic, the initial packet must have a very small non-zero 
momentum uncertainty (Ap)(0) ~ 0. (The mathematical form of a wave packet with 
these properties appears in Pblm. 4.6.) These and other properties of the incident wave 
packet are summarized in the box in Fig. 8.7a. 


< p >>0 



*(*, 0 ) 


<x> = -x 0 ; Ax » 0 
<P> = Pol Ap>0 
<f>= E 0 ;AE> 0 


(a) 

m 

(b) 





^rail I*' d ^trans ^ 

(C) 

Figure 8.7 (a) Before and (c) after a quantum collision. What happens during the 
collision [(b)) is a mystery, but a clue appears in Fig. 8.8. 

Now consider times t > 0. Until the incident particles near the target, the proba¬ 
bility density of their state is localized in regions where V^a;) « 0. So from f () to the 
“beginning of the collision” (a time t ~ t cn \\) t the projectiles propagate to the right as 

Sec. 8.3 Particles in Collision: An Introduction to Quantum Scattering 287 




free particles — i.e., according to § 6.7. The center of the probability density, for example, 
moves to the right at the group velocity, whose value we know to be v gr = ( p} (0) /m 9 

Eventually, the particles move into range of the potential, and their state functions 
begin to distort. The evolution of the wave packet during the collision (i.e., during the 
interval At) is described by the TDSE (8.9) with the barrier potential of Fig. 8.7. What 
happens then is nothing short of remarkable. Figure 8.8 shows the results of a computer’s 
solution of this equation for two barrier potentials of different widths. As a consequence 
of the incident particles’ encounter with the barrier, the incident packet seems to “break 
up,” forming two packets, one reflected, the other transmitted. But we in the laboratory 
cannot observe what happens during the collision, for the interaction takes place on a 
length scale of atomic dimensions, typically on the order of 10” 10 m. So we wait. 

Once the collision is “over” (i.e., at some t t co \\), we look to the detector to 
discover what happened. 10 After a large number of collisions have occurred, we tote up 
the fraction of particles that were reflected and the fraction that were transmitted. From 
these fractions, we then calculate the measured probability for reflection or transmission 
of a particle in the incident beam. 

These “measured probabilities” agree with quantum-mechanical predictions based 
on the reflected and transmitted wave packets obtained from solution of the TDSE at 
large t > f co ii. So both theory and experiment predict that the probability density after 
the collision consists of two pieces: one due to the reflected wave packet, which I’ll 
denote by ’3> lc fl(a;, £), the other due to the transmitted packet, ’il'transOM)* The mean 
momentum of the reflected packet is negative (i.e., it corresponds to particle motion 
in the — x direction), and that of the transmitted packet is positive (motion in the -\-x 
direction). But neither of these packets individually represents the state of the scattered 
particles —the wave function is the (unnormalized) superposition 

= 'SreflOM) + StransOM)' « » tcoll (8.11) 

After the collision, the reflected and transmitted packets propagate according to the free- 
particle Schrodinger equation, because, like the incident packet, they are localized in 
regions of zero potential. 11 

Your understanding of this collision as a quantum-mechanical phenomenon hinges 
on your grasp of the Bom interpretation of the wave packets in (8.11). Each packet 
is a probability amplitude. The reflected packet, for instance, is the amplitude for the 
possibility that in a position measurement after the collision, we would detect a particle 
at some x < -L/2 moving in the -x direction (towards the source)—a possibility 
we’ve described as reflection. The probability of this possibility actually occurring in 
an experiment can be calculated as |^ re fl(x,f)| 2 [although there is a much easier way 
to determine this infonnation (c.f, § 8.4)]. Note, by the way, that each particle in the 


9 The probability density also spreads a bit, but since wave packet spreading is not germane to our 
concerns here. I’ll neglect it. 

10 Actually, we need two detectors. In our one-dimensional paradigm, both reflection and transmission 
are possible, so we put one detector at large negative x and one at large positive x. In a three-dimensional 
collision, reflection and transmission are but two of an infinity of possible outcomes, corresponding to all 
angles 9 and <p in Fig. 8.6b. Reflection corresponds to 6 = n and transmission to 9 = 0. 

n This analysis holds until a scattered particle is detected. An encounter with a detector constitutes 
a measurement and actualizes one of the possibilities implicit in the wave function. Such a measurement 
therefore alters the state function (at the instant of detection), changing it into a function that is localized at 
the detector. For more on the fascinating subject of measurement in quantum theory see Chap. 13. 


288 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



P(x, t) i- P(x, t) 



289 


Figure 8.8 (a) Snapshots of the position probability density for a wave packet incident from the 
left on a potential barrier of height Vo and width L. (b) Same as (a) for a barrier of width L/2. 
(c) Same as (b) for a barrier of height 2Vo- In all three figures, the solid dot indicates the prediction 
of classical physics for this system. [From The Picture Book of Quantum Mechanics by S. Brandt 
and H. D. Dahmen (New York: John Wiley, 1985). Used with permission.] 




incident beam is either reflected or transmitted. In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, 
particles do not divide. 

Question 8-6 

By my choice of the mean momentum of the initial packet, I arranged the above example 
so that the mean momentum of the particles after the collision is negative, i.e., 

(p)(i) = (^(x,<) | p | #(£,*)) < 0 (tXcoii)- (8.12) 

What does this fact imply about the relative magnitude of the integrated probabilities for 
the reflected and transmitted packets? 

Solving Collision Problems with Continuum Stationary 
States 

Few practicing quantum physicists carry out the procedure I’ve just sketched. The 
numerical solution of the TDSE for a real collision remains impossible even on present- 
day supercomputers—which sad fact would seem to make the study of real scattering 
processes impossible. Happily, there is a way out of this conundrum. 

This gambit requires relaxing very slightly the normalizability requirement on state 
functions. To facilitate calculation of scattering probabilities, physicists have admitted 
into quantum mechanics a class of functions called continuum stationary-state functions. 
These functions are finite everywhere, but they are not normalizable. Hence a continuum 
stationary-state function is not, strictly speaking, physically admissible. Nevertheless, we 
can use such functions to solve scattering problems, provided we are very careful about 
their use and interpretation. 12 

You’ve already seen a continuum stationary-state function: the pure momentum 
function 

<Z p (x,t) = Ae Hkx -“‘\ (8.13a) 

which I used in § 6.9 to represent the state of particles in a beam. For instance, in 
Example 6.7 we learned how to choose the constants in this form to represent a beam 
of 0.01 eV particles with a current of 3.0nanoamp-cm 2 , viz., 

A = 3.161 x 10 -4 m -3/2 , 

k = 1.621 x 10 9 m -1 , (8.13ft) 

u = 1.520 x 10 14 sec -1 . 

And we found that the probability current density for this beam is j = 1.873x 10 14 sec -1 . 

I mention the probability current density because, beginning in the next section, this 
quantity will play a crucial role in our study of quantum collisions. There we’ll discover 
how to calculate reflection and transmission probabilities from current densities for the 
various wave packets shown in Fig. 8.5. But before turning to problem solving, let’s 
look further at the use in quantum collision theory of functions that are not physically 
admissible. 

Consider again the incident packet in the collision experiment of Fig. 8.7. I defined 
the initial parameters of this packet (which are shown in the figure) so as to minimize 

12 One can come to grief, for example, calculating expectation values of some observables with a 
continuum stationary-state function, for such expectation values may be infinite. And the integrated probability 
density (over all space) for a continuum stationary state is infinite: so this quantity cannot be interpreted as in 
§3.4. 


290 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



the energy uncertainty at t 0 = 0, (A£)(0). For a free particle, this quantity is related to 
the position uncertainty by 

(A £ )(0) = £a p (0)>^_J_ (8,4) 

Nature won’t let us produce a beam with (AE)( 0 ) = 0, so we must settle for 
(A£)( 0) <C 1. But according to Eq. (8.14), this condition implies that the packet is 
very fat: (Aa;)(0) » 1, i.e., we know little about the incident particle’s position. [We 
don’t need to know the initial position to analyze our experiment, provided the particle is 
initially far from the target, which we guarantee by choosing ( x ) (0) to be of macroscopic 
size, say (a) (0) = 10 m.] 

So the incident wave packet is a superposition of pure momentum states (8.13a), 
with momenta chosen so the momentum probability amplitude is narrowly peaked about 
Pa- An excellent approximation to this packet is the limit of an infinitely large packet : 
a pure momentum state with momentum p 0 = {p) (0) and energy E 0 = pi/2m. To 
summarize this argument: 


wave-packet 

(A£)(0)-0 

continuum stationary state 

description 

(Ax)(0)—»oo 

description 


Thus, a continuum stationary-state function is an idealized model of a huge wave packet, 
with a very small spread of energies about E 0 . In the (A£)(0) —> 0 limit, we can 
approximate the state of the particles in the beam by this monoenergetic continuum 
stationary-state function. 

Question 8-7 

Thought question: The energy uncertainty is related to the duration of the collision by the 
energy-time uncertainty relation (§ 11.8), (A£)(A£) > h/2. Based on this relation, discuss 
the consequences for our experiment of the requirement that (AE)(0) >, 0. 

Question 8-8 

With a little imagination, one can dream up a classical analogue of the time-independent 
picture of a microscopic collision. Consider the Rock of Gibraltar in a hurricane. Water 
waves (of considerable amplitude) scatter from the Rock. To detect them, we put the Queen 
Mary nearby and measure her vertical displacement. Consider first a short incident group of 
waves that encounter the Rock at t cu] \. Sketch the wave pattern in the ocean for t » 

Now suppose a huge wave group is (continuously) incident on the Rock; sketch the steady- 
state condition that obtains at t t co n. How is this classical example analogous to the 
quantum collisions of this section? 


8.4 SOLVING THE TISE FOR A PIECEWISE-CONSTANT 
POTENTIAL 

Although the details of how to solve bound- and continuum-state problems differ, certain 
characteristics are shared by both kinds of states. What makes solving the TISE for a 
piecewise-constant potential so easy is the simple analytic form of the “pieces” of the 
Hamiltonian eigenfunction in each region of space where the potential is constant. The 
particular functional form of these pieces depends on whether the energy of the state is 


Sec. 8.4 Solving the TISE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 291 





less than or greater than the value of the potential in the region, but in either case, the 
pieces of V'eM are easy to write down. Indeed, the only non-trivial part of solving the 
problem is hooking the pieces together. 

The piecewise-constant nature of the potentials we’ll consider in the rest of this 
chapter allow us to develop a simple five-step procedure for solving the TISE for such 
a system. Before we explore this procedure, here’s an overview, to which you can refer 
as you work through this section: 

Procedure for Piecewise-Constant Potentials. 

Step 1. Divide space (—oo < x < oo) into regions according to the values of 
V(a;). In each region, V(x) = constant. Then classify each region as classically 
allowed or classically forbidden according to the energy of the state. 

Step 2. Write down the general solution to the TISE in each region. 

Step 3. Impose physical conditions (as appropriate) on the pieces of iJje{x) in the 
first and last regions. These conditions will depend on whether the state is bound 
or unbound: for bound states, they ensure that the eigenfunction goes to zero as 
x —■» ±oo; for unbound states, they correspond to circumstances in the laboratory. 
Step 4. Hook the pieces of the eigenfunction together, using continuity conditions. 
Step 5. Finish the problem (methodology differs for bound and unbound states): 
Bound States: Impose boundary conditions (usually in the limits x —> ±oo) 
to obtain quantized energies. Then normalize the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions. 
Unbound States: Evaluate the probability current densities in the first and 
last regions and from them the probabilities for transmission and reflection. 

Regions and How to Classify Them 

To define the regions of a piecewise-constant potential we need only look at it. But to 
classify these regions, we must consider the energy of the state we are interested in. 
Thus the definition of a region is independent of the state; its classification is not. 

A region is simply a finite (or semi-infinite) range of x in which the potential is 
constant. Thus, in the q tb region 

V (ocj — V g —1 ^ X 3'q]' 

I region q 

(We allow for semi-infinite ranges, because the first region includes 
and the last includes x —» +oo.) This definition is illustrated in Fig. 

The equation we must solve in region q is the TISE 

+ v ")^ ){x) = E ^ )(x) [ x ?-> *«!• ( g - 16 > 

Clearly, the TISE in a particular region may differ from that in any other region. So, like 
Frankenstein’s monster, the Hamiltonian eigenfunction for energy E is assembled out of 


(8.15) 

the limit x —> —oo 
8.9. 13 


13 For consistency and convenience, I have chosen the zero of energy in (his section so that all energies 
and potentials are positive: E > 0 and V* > 0. But for some problems (e.g., the finite square well of § 8.9) 
it’s more convenient to choose the zero of energy at the top of a potential well. The latter choice is analogous 
to the convention used in atomic physics. 


292 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 





Figure 8.9 How to define and classify 
regions for (a) a piecewise-constant 
potential with 4 regions, and (b) a 
continuous potential. The classifications of 
regions for the potential in (a) can be found 
in Table 8.2. 


pieces, one per region. The relationship of the piece V , £ ) (^) to the full eigenfunction 
is simple but crucial: 

i>E(x) = i!>e\x) for [£,_! < x < z g ]. (8.17) 

For example, the system in Fig. 8.9a has four regions, so we construct its Hamil¬ 
tonian eigenfunction as 



14 Some students find “segmenting” the eigenfunction in this way confusing, probably because they try 
to ascribe overmuch physical significance to the pieces If you prefer, just think of this segmentation 

as a problem-solving strategy. The point to remember is: when all is said and done, physical information about 
the state is contained in the Hamiltonian eigenfunction iPe(x)- This procedure is similar to one in the study of 
transmission and reflection of electromagnetic waves through media with different indexes of refraction. (See, 
for example, Chap. 8 of Introduction to Electrodynamics by D. J. Griffiths (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice 
Hall, 1981) or § 4.3 of Optics, 4th ed. by E. Hecht and A. Zajac (Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1979). 


Sec. 8.4 Solving the USE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 293 




^e{x) = < 


-OO < X <X\ 
X\ < X < X2 


(8.19) 


' *%\x) 

*l>E ] ( x ) 


l 1p^\x) Xi\-1 < X < OO. 

Now that we’ve identified the regions, we must classify them. We classify each 
region according to the kinetic energy that a particle with energy E (the energy of the 
state we are interested in) would have were it in the region. Since E = T + V, the 
kinetic energy T = E — V q in region q would be positive or negative depending on the 
magnitudes of E and V q . The two possible cases, E > V and E < V, are dubbed 
classically allowed (CA) and classically forbidden (CF), because a (classical) particle 
would be “forbidden” from a region where its kinetic energy would be zero. We also 
use this classification scheme in studying continuous potentials V(x) (Chap. 9), so I’ll 
summarize it here for this general case: 


T = E - V(x) 


{ <0 if E < V(x) classically forbidden region 

>0 if E >V(x) classically allowed region 


This scheme is illustrated for the potential of Fig. 8.9a in Table 8.2. A preview of its 
application to continuous potentials appears in Fig. 8.9b. 

TABLE 8.2 CLASSIFICATIONS OF REGIONS 
FOR THE POTENTIAL IN FIG. 8.9a. 


Energy 

Region 1 

Region 2 

Region 3 

Region 4 

Ei 

Ei <Vi 

CF 

Ei < V 2 

CF 

Ei > V 3 

CA 

Ei < V 4 

CF 

e 2 

E 2 > Vi 

CA 

E 2 < V 2 

CF 

e 2 > V 3 

CA 

e 2 > V 4 

CA 

e 3 

E 3 > Vi 

CA 

e 3 > v 2 

CA 

e 3 > v 3 

CA 

e 3 >v 4 

CA 


The Hamiltonian Eigenfunction in a Classically-Allowed 
Region 

Our next step is to solve the TISE in each region. The solutions in all CA regions have 
the same functional form, as do those in all CF regions. So we’ll consider each case 
separately, starting with the CA regions. 

But first, let’s rearrange terms in the TISE (8.16) as 

(E - V q )^ ] (x) [xq-i <x< x q ]. (8.20) 

294 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




Equation (8.20) is just the TISE/or a free particle with E replaced by E - V q . Whether 
region q is CA or CF, this equation has the simple form 

d 2 

j function of x = constant x function of x. (8.21) 

This form makes it easy to write down the solutions in each case. 

Suppose the region is classically allowed, so E > V q . Then Eq. (8.21) is 

d 2 

function of x = - positive constant x function of x. (8.22) 

The solution of such an equation, the “function of x ” in (8.22), is an oscillatory plane 
wave. To write down such a function, we need to define the wave number k q for the 
region q as 


k q — 



wave number for CA region. 


In terms of this wave number, the TISE (8.20) looks like 


d 2 
dx 2 


^(z) = -k 2 ipg\x) 


CA region [x q -i < x < x q ]. 


(8.23) 


(8.24) 


Now, the second-order ordinary differential equation (8.24) has two linearly inde¬ 
pendent solutions. In fact, it has several sets of two linearly independent solutions. For 
example, it’s satisfied by the real functions 


{sin k q x, cos k q x] real, oscillatory solutions. (8.25) 

We can write the general solution of Eq. (8.24) as an arbitrary linear combination of the 
functions (8.25), with coefficients that I’ll denote by C ^ and D^\ 

^e\ x ) = cos k q x + D (<7) sin k q x CA region [rc g _i < x < x q ]. (8.26) 

But we need not use the particular linearly independent solutions (8.25). Indeed, 
we often prefer to use complex exponential functions, because doing so makes it easier 
to hook the pieces together (Step 4 of our procedure). In a CA region, these alternate 
solutions are 


e 1 complex, oscillatory solutions. (8.27) 

In terms of complex functions, we write the general solution—with, of course, different 
multiplicative coefficients than those in Eq. (8.26)—as 15 

X ) = A {q) e ik * x + B^e~ ikqX CA region [: x q _i < x < x q \. (8.28) 


15 Be sure you understand why these alternatives are physically and mathematically equivalent (see 
Table 8.3). If you don’t, have a look at any undergraduate differential equations text, such as Chaps. 1-3 of 
An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations by E. A. Coddington (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice 
Hall, 1961) or Chap. 8 of Mathematical Methods in the Physical Sciences, 2nd ed. by M. L. Boas (New York: 
Wiley, 1983). 


Sec. 8.4 Solving the TISE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 295 





Figure 8.10 Real oscillatory solutions of the TISE (used in a CA region) for k = 0.5 and k = 1.0. 

For convenience, I’ve collected several handy properties of the functions in (8.25) and 
(8.27) in Table 8.3. Useful graphs which you should examine carefully appear in Fig. 8.10. 


TABLE 8.3 FUNCTIONS USED IN PIECING TOGETHER THE 
HAMILTONIAN EIGENFUNCTION FOR PIECEWISE-CONSTANT 
POTENTIALS 


/(*) 

relations 

/(-*) 

dx 

Oscillatory Functions 

sin kx 

± ( e ikx _ e -ikxj 

— sin kx 

k cos kx 

cos kx 

I ( e 'kx + e -ikxj 

cos kx 

—ksinkx 

gi'fcx 

cos kx + i sin kx 

e~ ikx 

ike ikx 

g-tfcz 

cos kx — i sin kx 

e ikx 

—ike~ ikx 

Exponential Functions 

sinh kx 

I ( e «* _ c-**) 

— sinh kx 

k cosh KX 

cosh KX 

I (g** + e ~ KX ) 

cosh KX 

jcsinh kx 

e KX 

sinh kx + cosh kx 

e -Kx 

Ke *x 

e -Kx 

coshKX — sinh kx 

e KX 

-Kg-** 


The Hamiltonian Eigenfunction in a Classically-Forbidden 
Region 

It’s no more difficult to determine the pieces of the eigenfunction in a CF region than in 
a CA region. In a CF region, E - V q < 0, so the TISE (8.20) has the form 

d 2 

r function of x = + positive constant x function of x. (8.29) 

dx z 


296 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



The solutions of this equation are real exponential functions. [Compare Eqs. (8.29) and 
(8.22) and marvel at what a difference a little sign makes!] To write these solutions, we 
need to define the decay constant in the q th region, 


K q = y —jjr ( V q — E ) decay constant for a CF region. (8.30) 

In terms of this decay constant, the TISE becomes 

?( x ) = ^e\ x ) cf f egion [x q -i < x < x q ]. (8.31) 

By the way, the decay constant (8.30) is also called the attenuation constant, 
for reasons that are evident from Fig. 8.11. Whatever you call it, n q is a quantitative 
measure of the rate of decay of with increasing distance into the CF region 

[x q - 1 < X < Xq]. For this reason, the quantity l//c 9 is called the characteristic length 
for decay in region q. The piece ip^\:x ) attains 1/e of its maximum value iPe\ x q) a 
distance \/n q from the (left) boundary of the region. 

Now, one set of linearly independent solutions to Eq. (8.31) is 16 

| e -K,x^ e « q a;| real, exponential solutions. (8.32) 

In terms of these functions, we write the general solution in a CF region as 

^e\x) = A (q) e~ K ^ x + B iq) e K » x CF region [x 9 _i < x < x q ]. (8.33) 

An alternative form of the general solution can be written in terms of hyperbolic sine 
and cosine functions. The properties of these functions, along with those of the real 
exponentials (8.32), are summarized in Table 8.3, and handy graphs of both types of 
functions appear in Fig. 8.11. 

Question 8-9 

What is the counterpart of Eq. (8.26) for a CF region? (Hint: cos ire = coshx and 
sin ix = i sinh x.) 


Using the handy compendia in Table 8.2, we can easily analyze each region of a 
piecewise-constant potential and write down the piece of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction 
for each region. Of the steps in the procedure at the beginning of this section, there 
remains only to determine the coefficients in these pieces (and, for a bound state, the 
quantized energies)—matters we shall get to soon. But first, a couple of examples. 

Example 8.1. The Potential Step for E <V 0 : Act I (The Set-Up) 

One of the simplest piecewise-constant potentials is the potential step in Fig. 8.12. In this 
system, a beam of particles incident from the left encounters an impulsive force at z = 0. 

For this potential, we immediately espy two regions: one in which V(a;) is zero and 
one in which V(x) equals a positive constant Vo, i.e., 


V(x) = 


0 x < 0 
Vo x > 0. 


(8.34) 


1G Notice that were we to define a wave number k q , a la Eq. (8.23), for a CF region, this quantity would 
be imaginary. It would, in fact, be related to the decay constant K q by k q = iu q . With this substitution the 
oscillatory functions in (8.27) become the real functions in (8.32). 


Sec. 8.4 Solving the TISE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 297 






Figure 8.11 Solutions of the TISE for a CF region: exploding and decaying exponentials e K;r 
and e~ KX and hyperbolic functions sinh kx and cosh kx for k = 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0. (See also 
Table 8.3.) 

In this example, I’ll consider an energy E < Vo, so I can show you how to handle both 
CA and CF regions. (For E > Vq both regions are CA, right?) The wave numbers for 
each region are shown in Fig. 8.12, as is the general solution written in terms of ip\! : \x) 
and I’ve used the complex exponential form (8.28) in Region 1 to facilitate a later 

step, hooking the pieces together at the boundary x = 0 (see Example 8.3). 

Now that we have the general solution (Step 2), we must impose physical conditions 
in the first and last regions (Step 3). To see what physical conditions we need, consider the 
solution in Region 2, 

\x ) = A { 2 ) e~ K2X + B (2) e" 2X . (8.35) 

Immediately, we spot a problem: one of the linearly independent real exponentials, e * 2T , 
blows up in the limit x —» oo, which limit is included in Region 2. Such unsightly explosions 
are common: pieces of iJje(x) in semi-infinite CF regions are often plagued by exploding 

298 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 





Figure 8.12 Analysis of a continuum stationary state of the potential step with E < Vq. 


exponentials, because the real functions from which they are assembled have the unfortunate 
properties that 


e K3 

-♦ oo, 


x—*oo 

e~ KJ 

-* oo. 


T—*—OC 


Exploding Exponentials 


This behavior is just not acceptable: if we are to interpret the wave function ^(x, t) = 
rpE{x)e~ tEl/h as a position probability amplitude, we must never allow ip E {x) to become 
infinite—not at a finite value of x, nor in either asymptotic region. 

To eliminate this exploding exponential, we exploit the arbitrariness of the coefficients 
in (8.35). In particular, we set the coefficient that multiplies the offending term in ^ } (x) 
equal to zero: 


B (2 Uo =5. 4 2 >(i) = (8.36) 

Equation (8.36) is called an asymptotic condition. Asymptotic conditions are constraints we 
must impose on the spatial function to make it satisfy a physical requirement in an asymptotic 
region. In this instance, the asymptotic condition requires that ^e(x) not blow up as x -» oo 
(in Region 2). (We’ll discover another kind of asymptotic condition in Example 8.4, where 
we consider states with E > V^.) Such conditions impose physical constraints on the 


Sec. 8.4 Solving the TISE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 299 




allowable form of a mathematical solution; they are of such importance that we dignify 
them with a rule: 


Rule 

Once you have written down the pieces of a Hamiltonian eigenfunction, immediately 
set to zero all coefficients that multiply exploding exponentials in either asymptotic 
region (the first and the last regions). 


We can now assemble the solution to the TISE for the potential step for any energy 


E < Vo, 


$e{x) = 


A { 1 ) e ik ' x + B { 1 ) e~ iklX x < 0 
A { 2 ) e~ K2X x > 0. 


(8.37) 


[Incidentally, some authors refer to a decaying exponential such as tPe\x) by the more 
appealing name evanescent wave.] 

This completes the set-up of the problem of the potential step. Shortly, in Example 8.3, 
we’ll finish this problem by connecting the pieces of the eigenfunction. And we’ll return to 
the potential step for E > Vo in several examples in § 8.5. 


Question 8-10 

Prepare a figure like Fig. 8.12 for the case E > Vo. For such an energy do you need to 
worry about exploding exponentials? 


Example 8.2. The (Symmetric) Finite Square Well (The Set-Up) 

The symmetric finite square well in Fig. 8.13 is as famous in the study of bound states as 
the potential step is in the study of continuum states. This potential is the simplest (realistic) 
example that illustrates the essentials of bound-state quantum mechanics. In Fig. 8.13 is the 
set-up for solving the TISE for a bound state of this potential, i.e., for an energy E < Vo. 

Notice several points: 

1. We must enforce two asymptotic conditions, setting coefficients equal to zero 
in the two CF regions so as to stamp out exploding exponentials. 

2. Because the potentials in these CF regions, V\ and V 3 , are equal, so are the 
decay constants: k\ = K 3 . 

3. We could write the solution in Region 2, ipg\x), either in terms of real 
trigonometric functions (sin fax and cosfax) or in terms of complex expo¬ 
nentials ( e ,k ' 2X and e~ ,tC2X ). The real functions simplify the ensuing algebra 
(Example 8.7), so let’s choose them. 

We’re now ready to put the pieces together to fonn the Hamiltonian eigenfunction 
for a hound state (E < Vo), 


/ B {i) e KlX 

, 1 / 0 \ _ / 0 \ . 

-00 < x < — L/2 


iJ)e{x) = < C (2) cos fax + D (2) sin fax 

-L/2 <x<L /2 

(8.38) 

[ A w e~ K3X 

L/2 < x < 00 



To complete the solution of the TISE, we must hook these pieces together. This step 
determines all but one of the coefficients in Eq. (8.38). But since the state we’re investigating 
is hound , its energies are quantized, and we must perform an additional chore: we must 

300 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 





Figure 8.13 Analysis of a bound stationary state of a symmetric finite square well of height 
Vo and width L. 


find the values of these quantized energies , the particular eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian 
for which bound stationary-state eigenfunctions exist. I’ll defer this chore until § 8.7. 

Question 8-11 

Replicate Fig. 8.13 for the case E > V 0 . Write down the pieces of the Hamiltonian 
eigenfunction for such an energy. Is such a state bound or unbound? Why? 

Aside: Regions and the Nature of Stationary States. The nature of a stationary 
state (bound or continuum) is intimately related to whether the first and last regions 
are CA or CF. This connection follows from the conditions (8.7) or (8.8), only one 
of which is in force for a particular state: 


Rule 

A stationary state is bound if and only if the first and last regions are CF. 
If either region is CA, then there could be a non-zero probability of find¬ 
ing the particle in the state represented by ^(x,t) = i!)E{x)e~ iEt,h in the 
corresponding asymptotic region, so the state is not bound. 


This rule explains why the state in Example 8.1 is a continuum state even 
though its probability density decays to zero in Region 2 (/>., as x —> + 00 ). 


A Tale of the Hook 

Now we come to Step 4 in our procedure for solving the TISE for a piecewise-constant 
potential. A piecemeal creature like (8.38) is obviously not a complete solution, for we 
don’t know the coefficients multiplying all the ^-dependent factors in it. And there may 
be a lot of these as-yet-unknown coefficients, for in general 


Sec. 8.4 Solving the TISE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 301 




N regions 


2N constants: {A^ q \B^} for q = 1, 2, ..., N (8.39) 


The TISE within each region tells us nothing about the values of these coefficients. So 
we must consider the region boundaries. 

We determine the coefficients (8.39) by “hooking together” the pieces of the Hamil¬ 
tonian eigenfunction at these boundaries. The key to this procedure is found in the 
familiar mathematical requirements that any state function must satisfy (Chap. 3): 


t) must be continuous, finite, single-valued, and smoothly-varying at all x. 


The consequences of these requirements are the following conditions: 


continuity = 

=> continuous at x q 

smoothly-varying = 

=>■ continuous at x„ 

ax 


Continuity 

Conditions 


(8.40) 


Within each region , these conditions are automatically satisfied by -0^( x ) (see 
Table 8.3). But, as shown in Fig. 8.14, at the region boundaries, we must enforce them. 
We do so by again exploiting the arbitrariness of the multiplicative constants in the 
Hamiltonian eigenfunction (see Example 8.3). 17 

Enforcing the continuity conditions (8.40) determines all but one of the constants in 
the eigenfunction. The role of this remaining constant depends on the nature of the state: 
if the state is unbound, this constant reflects conditions in the scattering experiment; if it’s 
bound, this constant enforces normalization of the eigenfunction. We’ll see continuity 
conditions in action for bound states in § 8.7. For now, let’s apply them to a continuum 
state of the potential step. 


(q ~ D (q) 


^jr’Nx) x, *j?»(x) 


1 


t { E q -"(x q ) = t l E v) (x q ) 


d* { e q ~" 

_ d*)?' 


dx 

X = x q dx 

x = x q 


Figure 8.14 Continuity conditions at a 
region boundary for a piecewise-constant 
potential. 


^Mathematical difficulties arise when we try to justify these continuity equations at the (unphysical) 
points of discontinuity of a piecewise-constant potential. These are not problems to be worried about, but if 
you’d like to read about them, see D. Branson, Amer.Jour. Phys. 47, 100 (1979) and M. Andrews, ibid. 49, 
281 (1981). 


302 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 





Example 8.3. The Potential Step for E < Vo: Act II (The Hook) 

In Example 8.1 we considered a continuum state of the potential step with energy E < V 0 
and deduced the spatial function (8.37). Applying the continuity conditions (8.40) at the 
(finite) region boundary x = 0, we obtain two relations between the coefficients A (1) , 
and B^ 2 \ viz.. 


^e\ x = °) = e\ x = °) 


diff { E(x) 

dx 


i=0 


^e\ x ) 

dx 


x=0 


A W + B ‘" = A m , (8.41a) 

ikiA w - ik l B m = -k 2 A <2) . (8.41*) 


Equations (8.41) are two simultaneous algebraic equations in three unknowns. Solving 
them, we can evaluate two unknowns in terms of the third. For example, we can determine 
and A in terms of A* 1 *. Here’s how. 

Multiplying (8.41a) by K 2 and adding the result to (8.41/?), we find 


B ^ _ ik\ + K 2 _ ki — in? 

A* 1 ) ik\ - K 2 


(8.42a) 


(I’ve rearranged the terms in this result to obtain a cleaner form). Similarly, we find 


= 2 ky 

AH) ki + iK2 


(8.42/?) 


Now, using Eqs. (8.42), we can write the eigenfunction (8.37) in terms of one (still- 
unknown) coefficient, to wit: 


^e(x) = 


A (X) Je.-A.-1* + 

kx -«c 2 \ - Ifcl *' 

x < 0 

. k\ + i/C2 / 


4(1) ( 2kl 

) e~ K * x 

x > 0. 

\k\ + in 2 

) 



(E < Vo) 


(8.43) 


Note that the Hamiltonian eigenfunction for E < V 0 is complex and that the (evanescent) 
wave in Region 2 is a decaying exponential, not a travelling wave. 

As desired, the eigenfunction (8.42) is everywhere continuous and smoothly varying. 
In the next section, I’ll finish this example and will unveil the physical significance of 
the remaining coefficient, A (1) , and explain how we choose it to match the experimental 
(scattering) situation. We’ll also learn how to determine from xp E {x) the probabilities for 
reflection and transmission in continuum-state problems. 


I want to emphasize that nowhere (thus far) have I distinguished the problem¬ 
solving strategy we use for bound states from that for continuum states. To be sure, the 
differences between bound and continuum states (Table 8.1) have influenced several of 
our actions, e.g., specification of the piece of the eigenfunction in the first and/or last 
regions, and the asymptotic conditions that may have to be imposed on these pieces. 
But the basic procedure outlined at the start of this section holds for either kind of state: 
identify regions, classify them, write down the piece for each region, and hook the pieces 
together. For either kind of state, the solution in each region is a linear combination 
of simple, analytic functions (Table 8.3), although the particular form of each of these 
functions depends on whether the region is CA or CF. So you don’t really have to learn 
two different problem-solving methods to handle the two different kinds of states. Isn’t 
that nice? 


Sec. 8.4 Solving the USE for a Piecewise-Constant Potential 303 



8.5 THE INTERPRETATION OF CONTINUUM-STATE 
EIGENFUNCTIONS 

“There is work to be done.” 

—Count Dracula 
in Dracula 
by Bram Stoker 

To solve scattering problems, we use continuum stationary-state functions such as the 
pure momentum function of Chap. 4 (c./., § 8.3). Two quantities are essential to the 
interpretation of continuum stationary states: the reflection and transmission coefficients 
R(E ) and T(E). Although these quantities are called “coefficients,” they’re actually 
probabilities. They answer the question, what is the probability that an electron incident 
from the left with energy E will be reflected (or transmitted) by its encounter with a 
potential V(x)? In this section, I’ll introduce these coefficients via the corresponding 
probability amplitudes. 

The reflection and transmission coefficients are defined in terms of the incident, 
reflected, and transmitted fluxes. These quantities are the probability current densities for 
the possible outcomes of the collision. We can calculate these current densities from the 
pieces of the continuum stationary-state function iPe(x), provided each piece corresponds 
to a travelling wave or to a standing wave , which is just a superposition of travelling 
waves. 

For example, the piece of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction (8.43) (for the potential 
step) that corresponds to Region 1 is a sum of two terms. One corresponds to a travelling 
wave propagating in the +x direction (the e tklX term), the other to a wave propagating 
in the —x direction (the e~ lk ' lX term). These are the incident and reflected waves, 
respectively. 

Aside: A quick review. The pure momentum functions Ae^ px ~ Et ^ h and 
Ae~ t(kPX+Et ^ h represent travelling waves that propagate in the -fz and —x direc¬ 
tions, respectively. This interpretation is consistent with the fact that the momentum 
of the first wave is +p and that of the second is -p. For a pure momentum state 
that represents a state of a beam of non-interacting particles , the probability density 
is ( cf ., § 6.8-6.9) 

P{x,t) = \A\ 2 = number of particles per unit length 

j(x,t) = ±— \A\ 2 = number of particles incident on 1 m 2 
m 

area perpendicular to the beam 

Example 8.4. The Potential Step for E > V 0 : Act III (Reflection and Transmission 
Coefficients) 

Let’s work out the reflection and transmission coefficients for the eigenfunction (8.37) of 
Example 8.3. The piece of this function in Region 1 of the potential step consists of two 
travelling waves: 

^e\ x ) = A ll) e iklX , + B {l) e~ iklX , . (8.45) 

incident reflected 

This function is a superposition of an incident wave of amplitude |A (1) | and a reflected 
wave of amplitude 


(8.44a) 

(8.44ft) 


304 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



We can use the ratio j from Eq. (8.42a) to calculate the amplitude of the 
reflected wave. We find, interestingly, that |£ (1) | = |A (1) |. That is, in Region 1 two waves 
of equal amplitude travel in opposite directions at the same phase velocity. [That’s why 
iJ)e\x), the superposition of these waves, is an (oscillatory) standing wave.] Because the 
amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves are equal, the total probability flow into or 
out of this region is zero. 18 

This means that every particle in the incident beam (with E < 14) will be reflected 
by its encounter with the step at x = 0. The probability of reflection is therefore unity, and 
that of transmission is zero: 


R(E) = 1 
T(E) = 0 


[potential step for E < Vo]. 


(8.46) 


This result is just what we’d expect were we applying classical physics to this problem. But 
don’t be misled by this coincidence. As we’ll see in Examples 8.5 and 8.6, the reflection 
and transmission coefficients for E > Vo violate our classical expectations. 

The interpretation we’ve applied to ip^ix) doesn’t fit the piece of V>e(z) in Region 2. 
This function isn’t a travelling wave; it is a decaying—or evanescent—wave. Its amplitude 

\A W \ = \A {1) \ ,? k .\ =e~ K2X (8.47) 

V ^1 + k 2 


decreases with increasing x in Region 2 at a “decay rate” given by the decay constant « 2 , 
as you can see from the probability density in Fig. 8.15. This finding is consistent with our 
discovery [Eq. (8.46)] that all incident particles with E < Vo are reflected. No probability 
flow is associated with an evanescent wave. 


Question 8-12 

Prove that the probability current density for the function e ~ KX e~ xEt ^ h is zero. 


Reflection and Transmission of Particles by the Potential 
Step 


The predictions of quantum mechanics for the behavior of a beam of particles with energy 
E < Vo that impinges on the potential step conform to the predictions of classical physics 
that such particles will be reflected but not transmitted. But how about particles with 
E > Vo? Well, classical physics predicts that such particles will be transmitted but not 
reflected. Let’s see what quantum physics predicts. 


Example 8.5. A Second Look at the Potential Step; (E > Vo) 

In Question 8-9, you determined the general form of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction for a 
state of the potential step with E > Vo, obtaining 


J $W(x) = A {l) e ik ' x + B (l) e~ iklX -oo<x<0 
\ rJ,W( x ) = A (2) e ik * x + B (2) e~ ik2X 0 < x < oo. 


(8.48) 


18 Another way to see this feature of ipg\x) is to write this function in terms of real oscillatory 
solutions (8.25), viz., 

-[A:i cos A:i a* — «2 sinfcia]. 

A’l + «2 

The a dependence in this result is that of a standing wave. 


Sec. 8.5 The Interpretation of Continuum-State Eigenfunctions 305 




(a) 


P(x, t) 



(b) 


Figure 8.15 The probability density for a 
continuum stationary state of the potential 
step with E < Vq . 


For such a state, both regions are classically allowed, and the wave numbers in the pieces 
of the eigenfunction (8.48) are 

fc, = Jjp(E-V,). (9=1,2). (8.49) 

In this example, we’ll hook these pieces together. Then, in Example 8.6, we’ll calculate the 
reflection and transmission coefficients for this state. 

Before applying the continuity conditions, we must consider the asymptotic condi¬ 
tions. Each piece of (8.48) is oscillatory, so we needn’t cope with exploding exponentials. 
But there is nonetheless an asymptotic condition we must enforce if the general form (8.48) 
is to conform to the experiment. 

To see the origin of this condition, note first that we can interpret each term of each 
piece as a travelling wave. To clarify this point, let’s write the tint e-dependent state function 
corresponding to Eq. (8.49), 


f A (1) e , ( fc ‘ x - ta '‘ 0 + B {1) e- i(kix+ “ lt) -oo<x<0 

*£(*, 0 = | A m e n^,-u,,i) + B m e -,«- 2 *+„ 2 t) o < x < oo. (8 50a) 

The angular frequencies in this function correspond to the wave numbers (8.49); they are 

hkl E -V„ , 

W" = 2^- = —j—* (9=1,2). (8.50ft) 

Now, consider Eq. (8.50a) in light of Table 8.4. Do you see the problem? 


306 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




TABLE 8.4 PIECES OF THE EIGENFUNCTION FOR 
THE POTENTIAL STEP WITH E > V 0 


Term in 

Interpretation 

A^)e ik i* 

A (2) e ik 2 x 
£(2) e —1*2* 

incident wave (momentum +tiki) 
reflected wave (momentum —hk\) 
transmitted wave (momentum +hk 2 ) 
incident wave (momentum —hk 2 ) 


The problem is that one term in Eq. (8.50a) does not conform to the experimental 
arrangement in this example: a beam of particles incident from the left on the potential 
step V(x). This arrangement does not include a source of particles travelling to the left 
(with momentum -hk 2 ). So to make our mathematical solution conform to the physical 
experiment, we must set j 3 (2) = 0 in Eqs. (8.48) and (8.50 a). 

Like the asymptotic condition that prohibits exploding exponentials, the requirement 
that the eigenfunction we construct must conform to the experimental set-up is a consequence 
of the physics that we impose on the mathematics : 


Rule 

Once you have written down the pieces of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction, set to zero 
any coefficients that multiply incident travelling-wave terms for which there is no 
source in your experiment. 


Putting together the remaining pieces and using the continuity conditions (8.40) to 
hook them together, we obtain for the continuum function for a state with energy E > Vo 
the astounding result 


^ e(x ) = 


[e'* lX + ( 

<k\ 

<ki 

t 

x<0 

/ 2 fci ' 


k 2 x 

x>0 

\ k\ + k 2 , 

r 



(E > Vo) 


(8.51) 


What is astounding in this result is the reflected travelling wave in Region 1 . The presence 
of this term means that for E > V 0t we’ll find T(E) < 1 and R(E) ± 0. These predictions 
are quite different from those of classical physics. Indeed, it’s impossible to understand 
from classical arguments how a particle with E > Vo could be reflected by the step. We’ll 
evaluate these probabilities in the grand finale, Example 8.6. 


Question 8-13 

Fill in the steps leading to Eqs. (8.51). You can do this using our straightforward hooking 
procedure or, more easily, by thinking about how this state differs from the one in Eq. (8.43). 


Question 8-14 

Graph the probability density for a state with E > Vo ( c.fl , Fig. 8.15). 


The Reflection and Transmission Coefficients 


The form of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction in Example 8.5 is typical of continuum 
stationary states (for a beam incident from the left): 


Sec. 8.5 The Interpretation of Continuum-State Eigenfunctions 307 





^ e( x ) = 


incident-wave term + reflected-wave term “source region” 


(8.52) 


^ transmitted-wave term "detector region” 

The terms source region and detector region in (8.52) explicitly remind us where the 
source and the detector are. We note two “scattered waves,” the reflected wave and the 
transmitted wave, each of which represents one possible outcome of the encounter of the 
particles in the incident beam with the potential step. 

To clarify the role of these scattered waves, let’s express them in terms of the 
incident amplitude. To this end, we’ll define a quantity p(E) that relates the amplitude 
of the reflected wave to that of the incident wave: 

B w = p(E)A {l) . (8.53 a) 


The counterpart of this quantity for the transmitted wave is 

A { ‘ 2) =t{E)A^ 1 K 


(8.53 b) 


These quantities (which may be complex) are probability amplitudes: p(E) is the re¬ 
flection probability amplitude and t(E) the transmission probability amplitude. In 
terms of these amplitudes, we can write the general eigenfunction (8.52) as 

f AWe ik ' x + AWp(E)e- iklX x<0 
ip E (x) = { (E> V 0 ). (8.54) 

[ A^r(E)e ik * x x > 0 

Now, from these probability amplitudes we can calculate the reflection and trans¬ 
mission coefficients. To do so, we return to the probability current densities—the fluxes— 
for the incident, reflected, and transmitted waves. For each wave, we’ll obtain the prob¬ 
ability current density by substituting the appropriate piece of into the definition 

of this quantity. Then we’ll call upon Eq. (8.52) to help us interpret these densities. 
Let’s do it. 

By definition, the probability current density for ip^\x) is 




ih 
2 m 



(8.55) 


[Don’t forget that each of the pieces ^^{x) is only part of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction; 
the probability current density for the full stationary-state eigenfunction, j(x,t), is zero.] 
Inserting the pieces from (8.54) into this definition, we obtain 


f j(i) _ p^ 4 (i )|2 _ I^I 1 )] 2 |p(£!)| 2 ] source region 

| j(2) _ 5^|^(i)|2 \ t (E)\ 2 detector region. 

' m 


(8.56) 


What does this result mean physically? Well, look first at Region 1. In this region 
the probability current density j is the sum of an incident flux j\ nc and a reflected flux 
In Region 2, the current density j is the transmitted flux jtians- If we identify these 
fluxes as 


308 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



m 

(8.57a) 

jrefl = -~'l'4* 1 *| 2 |p(i2)| 2 

(8.576) 

j lra „ s = 

m 

(8.57c) 

we can write the current density as 


. _ f jinc + Jrefl source region 
l Jtrans detector region. 

(8.58) 


Notice that the reflected flux j re R must carry a minus sign, because the momentum 
of the reflected wave is -hk\ (/>., this wave “travels” in the -x direction). Also 
note the presence in Eqs. (8.57) of the squared moduli of the reflection and transmitted 
probability amplitudes p(E) and t(E). Such factors are just what we’d expect to find 
in probabilities. 

And, indeed, the step to the reflection and transmission probabilities is a small one. 
The reflection probability R{E), for example, is equal to the fraction of particles in the 
incident beam that are reflected. This fraction is simply the ratio of the reflected flux 
to the incident flux [see Eq. (8.446)]. Making a similar argument for the transmission 
coefficient, we arrive at the definitions 


R(E) = = |p(B)|2 

Mine I 

T(E ) = = ^|t(£)| 2 . 

Mine| «1 


(8.59) 


Note carefully the ratio of wave numbers k^/ki in the transmission coefficient. Many 
novice problem solvers forget this factor and wind up with grossly erroneous transmission 
coefficients (unless the potential is such that V\ = V )y). 

Coefficients like those in (8.59) are the cornerstones of quantum collision theory (in 
one dimension). For more complicated problems, we can develop expressions for these 
coefficients using the procedure of this section: we work from the probability current 
densities and from our interpretation of the terms in the Hamiltonian eigenfunction as 
incident, reflected, and travelling waves. In the next section, we’ll work through a more 
strenuous example of this procedure. But first, we’ve got to finish off the potential step. 

Example 8.6. The Last of the Potential Step for E > Vo 

Little remains to be done. To determine the reflection and transmission coefficients for this 
case, we just read the corresponding amplitudes off the eigenfunction (8.51) and substitute 
them into the definitions (8.59), obtaining 


R(E) = \ P (E)\ 
k 2 


2 _ f k\ — fa \ 2 

\ k\ + / 

4&1 &2 


{E > Vo) 




( 8 . 60 ) 


Since each incident particle must be either reflected or transmitted, the sum of these proba¬ 
bilities must equal one, 


R{E)+T(E) = 1. 


( 8 . 61 ) 


Sec. 8.5 The Interpretation of Continuum-State Eigenfunctions 309 




This requirement is a useful check on our algebra. 

In contrast to Eq. (8.46) for E < Vo, our results (8.60) for E > V 0 do not conform 
to the predictions of classical physics. They do, however, agree with laboratory findings. 


Question 8-15 

In Eq. (8.46) we deduced the reflection and transmission coefficients for states of the poten¬ 
tial step with E < Vo. Verify these deductions with a calculation based on the eigenfunction 
(8.43) and the definitions (8.59). 


Question 8-16 

Solve the TISE and calculate the reflection and transmission coefficients for scattering by 
the potential step of a particle with E = V b. 


Generalization and Summary 


We have seen how to solve the TISE for continuum states of a piecewise-constant po¬ 
tential and how to interpret the resulting eigenfunctions to obtain scattering information: 
the probabilities of reflection and transmission. Although we have worked only with the 
potential step, which contains but a single point of discontinuity, the method of this sec¬ 
tion easily generalizes to more complicated piecewise-constant potentials, such as those 
in Fig. 8.16. 

In fact, the only difference between the solution of the present example and the 
procedure for finding the reflection and transmission coefficients for a piecewise-constant 
potential with an arbitrary number of discontinuities is the quantity and complexity of 
the algebra involved. If we label the final region (where the detector is located) by N , 
we can write the solution of the TISE in the source and detector regions as a simple 
generalization of the form (8.54) for the potential step. 19 

For example, if, as in Fig. 8.16, the energy of the state satisfies E > V\ and 
E > V)v, then the eigenfunction is 

( [e ,fcl * + p\(E)e~ lklX ] source region 


ip E {x) = < 


( 8 . 62 ) 


l A^T^(E)e tkff ' x detector region. 

If, as in (8.62), the pieces of the eigenfunction in the source and detector regions corre¬ 
spond to travelling waves, then both reflection and transmission are possible, and both 
R(E) and T(E) are non-zero and less than one. But if E < V}v, then the wave in the 
detector region is evanescent, and the probability of transmission is zero. 


lu In problems with many regions, we may not need to solve for all the pieces of the eigenfunction. 
We may instead be able to use continuity conditions to determine the reflection and transmission probabilities, 
bypassing evaluation of the forms of for intermediate regions q = 2,..., N — 1. Herein lies the art 

of solving problems with piecewise-constant potentials. 


310 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



V(x) t 







(1) (2) (3) 


V{x) t 










(1) 

(2) 

(3) ** 



Figure 8.16 Identification of the source and detector regions for several piecewise- 
constant potentials. 

8.6 TUNNELLING FOR FUN AND PROFIT 


“There is work, 
wild work to be done.” 

—Professor Van Helsing 
in Dracula 
by Bram Stoker 


We have discovered that all particles with E < Vo incident on a potential step of height 
Vi) are reflected. So although quantum mechanics predicts penetration into the CF 


Sec. 8.6 Tunnelling for Fun and Profit 311 




region of this potential— i.e., the probability density in this region is non-zero—we can’t 
demonstrate this phenomenon in the laboratory. 

But we can demonstrate penetration into a CF region if we “chop off’ the potential 
step, changing it into the barrier of width L in Fig. 8.17, 20 

1 0 x <0 

Vo 0 <x<L. (8.65) 

0 x>L 

According to quantum physics, particles with E <V o incident on the barrier from the left 
will penetrate the potential and be transmitted into the classically-allowed region beyond, 
where we can detect them. This is the amazing, wholly non-classical phenomenon of 
tunnelling —the topic of this section. 



Figure 8.17 The barrier and its regions for a particle incident from the left with energy E < Vq. 


Tunnelling is a fascinating phenomenon, both in its own right and for its many 
applications. For example, tunnelling explains the existence of doublets in the vibrational 
spectra of the ammonia molecule (NH 3 ) due to inversion of its nuclear geometry, a 
property that is important in the design of atomic clocks and the ammonia beam maser; 21 
the emission of alpha particles from a radioactive nucleus, which is relevant to reactor 
design; 22 and the field emission of electrons. 23 And barrier penetration is important 

20 Ordinarily, the symmetry of a potential such as the one in Fig. 8.17 would argue for choosing x = 0 
at the midpoint of the barrier. But in this problem, we can simplify the algebra slightly by choosing the origin 
at one of the region boundaries, the points at which we must apply continuity conditions. And in this problem, 
we need all the help we can get. 

21 See § 12-2 of Atomic and Space Physics by A. E. S. Greene and P. J. Wyatt (Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wcslcy, 1965). 

22 See, for example, § 4-5 of Elements of Nuclear Physics by W. E. Meyerhoff (New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1967). 

23 See T. Ando, A. B. Fowler, and F. Stem, Rev. Mod. Phys. 54, 437 (1982). 


312 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 






„ *, ,***.**. - —I “—'• “ 

''“"Mi'™"™-™. 

microscope that has been deve ope y _ enetrat i on by electrons near the surface 
Zurich. This amazing fence ts based,°"f*££ Theseelectrons form a "cloud” of 
Of a solid sample through the barrier babim of detecting one of these elec- 

probability outside the sample. Ahh g p J n induce and measure 

irons decays exponentially with distancefrom,.he>- ^ of , 00 milUon _ 

a current of these electrons, hundredths the size of an atom! For this 

SS2 Drs^Gerd Binning"nd Heinrich Rohrer won half of -he 1986 Nobel Prize 

^ssis.ts: 

incident on a potential bamet. ve evo ^ brajcal]y) , he most complicated problem 
raise your algebraic conscmusn ° ( g some nifty organizational and 

problem-sdvhigrtckt'that are vitaUothe mastery of the art and craft of quantum physics. 

So get out paper and pencil and follow along. 

The Set-Up 

The regions of the barrier po.en.ial and .heir ^c^onjor^ 

ssrjKJrr-*^:—-—- -— 

which particles are incident fwm the ep. /o 4 qn t the boundaries x = 0 

Our next step is to apply the cont,nutty c—^cliy t0 the rat io of the 
and x = L. These conditions . we need t0 determine the transmission 

transmitted to incident flux—^ very aluate t he transmission probability 

SSrJg So of fte am^ditude of the transmitted wave » - - - 

incident wave, A (1) . 27 

From Continuity Conditions to Scattering Probabilities 

.... c th p nieces of the Hamiltonian eigen- 

The results of applying continuny condmons .o we can relate A ,s, to 

function in Fig. 8.17 appear m Table 8.5. Usmg th q Region , „ through 

4 ( 1 ). One fairly efficient route to this relationsmp 

r . n n f Experiments in Modern Physics by A. C. 
24 For a practical look al ibis a PP'' c “' on '“ h fi ^ a grea t deal more aboul tunnelling in Quantum 
Melissinos (New York: Academic Taylor and Francis, 1987). 

——es n: “«- -* - - * —* * 

‘'^’-Readers interested in an alternate (StoS 

introduce should peruse the two useful papers by J. E. Draper, 

749 (1980). . (p , , , he rati0 of to A^ l) . I’ll do 

only «• -- - a — 

Tunnelling for Fun and Profit 313 


Sec. 8.6 



TABLE 8.5 CONTINUITY CONDITIONS FOR THE POTENTIAL BARRIER IN EQ. (8.65). 



Region 2” into Region 3 by systematically eliminating all coefficients except the two we 
need. 

We don’t need so let’s get rid of it: 

Step 1. eliminate B (1 > by deriving an equation relating y^ 1 ), and £ (2 >. 

Step 2. Next we must relate A < 3 > to the ratio A^/B^: derive expressions for 
A and for B^ in terms of 

Step 3. This sets us up to complete the problem: combine the results of steps 1 
and 2 to obtain an expression for the ratio A^/A^ l \ 

Step 1 is easy: we just multiply Eq. (8.66) by ik and add it to Eq. (8.67), obtaining 

2 ikA^ = (ik - k)AW + ( ik + k ) B ™. (8 .70) 

Step 2 entails two manipulations. Multiplying Eq. (8.68) by -k and adding the result 
to Eq. (8.69) gets us an expression for A&\ and multiplying (8.68) by k and adding to 
(8.69) gets us B (2 >: 

A<> 2) = tk e ikL e KL A {3) 

2 K 

b(2) _ K + lk e ik Le -KL A ( 3 ) 

2 K 

Last, we carry out Step 3 by inserting Eqs. (8.71) and (8.72) into (8.70) and rearranging 
slightly. The result of these machinations is the desired ratio, 

_ 4 ink _ il%T . _ 

AM - [(« + ik) 2 e~* L -(k- ik) 2 e KL ] 6 * < V °^ (8l73) 

This step doesn’t complete the problem, but Eq. (8.73) is an important intermediate 
result. This ratio is useful, for example, in the analysis of limiting cases such as a very 
fat barrier or a high-energy state (see below). But before investigating these special 
cases, we’ll use Eq. (8.73) to derive the transmission coefficient. To make this task a 
bit easier, I want to first simplify the form of this ratio. 


(8.71) 

(8.72) 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




Crafty Simplifications 

The grail of our quest is the transmission coefficient 


T(E) = 


A< 3 > 


Ad) 


/ A< 3 > 

“ U (1) 


A< 3 >\* 
Ad)J • 


(8.74) 


But working with an expression as complicated as (8.73) is fraught with peril. If your 
imagination is in good working order, you may be able to visualize the algebraic swamp 
we would enter were we to just plug Eq. (8.73) into (8.74). As we perform the necessary 
algebraic manipulations to obtain a workable expression for T(E), it’s very easy to 
omit one or another of the multitude of symbols in this expression, to switch + and 
— signs, or to omit a power, or .... One way to minimize the likelihood of such 
blunders is to introduce intermediate quantities that simplify the form of the equation 
we’re manipulating. 28 

For example, it usually helps to write our result in terms of dimensionless constants. 
One such constant is the ratio of the wave number k to the decay constant n, a quantity 
I’ll call P : 


K 


(8.75) 


To write the ratio (8.73) in terms of P, let’s multiply its numerator and denominator by 

l/(4« 2 ): 


_ 4 < 3 > 


i(i) 


„—ikL 




(8.76) 


The form of the denominator in (8.76) suggests the definition of a second intermediate 
quantity. 


.'I i k 
" =I .2 + 2 k 


(8.77) 


Notice that a and its complex conjugate appear in the denominator of (8.76). 

With these definitions in hand, we can write the amplitude ratio (8.76) in the more 
malleable form 


A< 3 > 

Ad) 


ip 


— ikL 


a 2 e -fiL _ 


Inserting this fonn into equation (8.74) for T(E) we easily obtain 

P 2 


T(E) = 


a 2 a* 2 ( e~ 2KL + e 2tiL ) — (a* 4 + a 4 ) 


(8.78) 


(8.79) 


This formula is still far from elegant, and exploring its mathematical features, graphing 
it, examining it in various limiting cases, and programming it efficiently on a hand 
calculator or personal computer are likely to be awkward chores. So let’s try to simplify 
it further. 


28 The gambits I’m going to illustrate are standard operating procedure for problem solvers. So please 
don’t think of them as restricted to just this example; instead, remember them as tricks of wide applicability. 


Sec. 8.6 Tunnelling for Fun and Profit 315 



Gazing at Eq. (8.79), we notice in its denominator a pair of exponentials that differ 
only in their sign: e~ 2tiL and e 2tiL . We can write the difference of these functions as a 
hyperbolic sine function, viz.. 


e —2 kL + e 2 kL _ (g-K L _ e KLj 2 + 2 _ 4 ^2 kL + g 
And we can write the sum of a* 4 and ot 4 in terms of a completed square, as 


a * 4 + a 4 = 


(a 2 - a* 2 )" + 2a* V] = [ -0 2 + 2a* V . 


(8.80a) 


(8.80Z?) 


Now, inserting Eqs. (8.80) in (8.79), we obtain a more tractable form for the transmission 
coefficient for a potential barrier, our final result 


T(E) = 


_ P _ 

J (1 + /J 2 ) 2 sinh 2 kL + 0 2 


for E <V 0 


(8.81a) 


Investigating the Transmission Coefficient 

Having gone to all this work, let’s look at the transmission coefficient in several alternate 
forms: 


T(E) = 




l + ^sinh ! «I 
4 13 2 

4k? k 2 

(k 2 + n 2 ) 2 sinh 2 kL + 4k 2 E 2 
n -i 


E < V 0 


1 + - 


sinh kL 




(8.81^) 

(8.81c) 

(8.8 Id) 


Each of these forms displays a different kind of information. For example, Eq. (8.81c) 
highlights the dependence of T(E) on k and k, and (8.81 d) shows its dependence on the 
energy E. 


Question 8-17 

Derive Eqs. (8.81). 


Question 8-18 

Show that the reflection coefficient for E < Vo is given by 

(8.82) 

(There are two ways to do this exercise: easy and hard. Think: what condition must T(E) 
and R(E) satisfy? Now, what is the easy way?] Although this result is easily derived, it’s 
inelegant. How many useful alternate forms for R(E) can you devise? 


R{E) = 


sinh 2 kL 




1 + 


sinh 2 kL 


<(*)(»-*) 


316 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




Question 8-19 

Consider a state with E > Vo. There are two ways to derive the transmission coefficient: 
the hard and the easy. The hard way is to go through algebraic contortions like those that 
led us to Eq. (8.81<?) (doing so is, however, useful practice). The easy way is to set up 
the problem—as I did for E < Vo in Fig. 8.17—and then to think carefully about how the 
present problem differs mathematically from the example we just solved. Solve this exercise 
the easy way, showing that in terms of the wave number in the region 0 < x < L, 


(E-Vo) t 


the transmission coefficient is 


T(E) = 


1 - 


sin 2 kiL 


<(*) (1-f) 


E>V 0 


(8.83) 


(8.84) 


The transmission coefficient of Eqs. (8.81) is on display in Fig. 8.18. This figure 
shows two “views” of barrier penetration. For completeness, it also includes the coef¬ 
ficient for the continuum states of Question 8-19, i.e., those whose energies are greater 
than the barrier height. 

The results in this figure are nothing less than remarkable. Look at Fig. 8.18a 
and compare its implications to your classical expectations. Classical physics would 
predict that no particles with E < V 0 are transmitted; quantum mechanics reveals that 
the probability of transmission of such particles increases hyperbolically with increasing 
energy. The other case is equally confounding: classical physics would predict that 
all incident particles with E > Vq are transmitted; quantum mechanics shows that 
this condition—called total transmission —occurs only at a few discrete energies. An 
incident particle with an energy E > V 0 that lies between these special values may 
be reflected. The probability that such a reflection will occur diminishes rapidly with 
increasing E. 

For another perspective on transmission and reflection by a barrier, look at 
Fig. 8.18b. In this graph, the energy E and the barrier height Vo are fixed and T(E) 
is plotted as a function of the harrier width L. This figure shows another bizarre result: 
for a given energy E , only barriers of certain widths will transmit all particles of this 
energy. (Such barriers are said to be “transparent.”) But there is no value of the width 
such that a barrier of this width reflects all incident particles, because for all values of 
L, the reflection coefficient R{E) is less than one. 

Question 8-20 

Denote by A 2 the de Broglie wavelength in the barrier region, 0 < x < L. How is A 2 
related to the special widths L at which total transmission occurs? 

Question 8-21 

The transmission and reflection coefficients tell only part of the story. Derive the ratios 
of and £ (2) to A (1) , and use your results to write down an explicit form for 

^e(s). Consider both cases: E > Vo and E < Vo. 

The probabilities of Fig. 8.18 are one step removed from the eigenfunction of 
Question 8-21. In Fig. 8.19, you’ll find a graph of the real part of this (complex) 
function for an energy E < Vq. Notice the penetration of the harrier and the oscillatory 


Sec. 8.6 Tunnelling for Fun and Profit 317 




(a) 



(b) 


Figure 8.18 The transmission coefficient for barrier penetration (a) as a function of E 
for fixed Vo and L, and (b) as a function of L for fixed Vo and E > Vo. The parameters 
of the barrier in (a) were chosen so that L 2 Vq = 10 h 2 /m. 


behavior in the two CA regions. Because of the hyperbolic decay of the eigenfunction 
in the CF region, the amplitude of the eigenfunction in the detector region, x > L (and 
hence its probability density in this region), is reduced from its value in the source region. 
(Don’t be misled by the oscillations in the region x > L; the only wave in this region is 
the transmitted wave, so the probability density there is constant.) 

Question 8-22 

Suppose we change the sign of Vo so that the barrier in Fig. 8.17 becomes a potential well 
(see Fig. 8.16). Consider a continuum stationary state of this potential well (E > 0). How 
can you trivially derive from Eq. (8.81c) an expression for T(E) for this case? 


Aside: Scattering Theory in Three Dimensions. We now leave scattering problems 
and continuum states for a while. So I would like to close this section by relating 
what we have learned about scattering problems in the real (three-dimensional) world. 
In three dimensions, forward scattering (transmission) and backward scattering (re¬ 
flection) are two of an infinite number of possibilities. The “detection probability” 
for scattering is the differential cross section dcr/dSl. The value of this quantity at 
angles 0 and ip (see Fig. 8.6) is the probability that a particle will be detected at these 
angles. The corresponding probability amplitude is called the scattering amplitude; 


318 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 

















( 

-vwJ 

) L 

N-jA/WV •. 


Figure 8.19 The probability density |V'eC®)! 2 for a continuum state of a particle in¬ 
cident on a barrier. The energy of the state is E < Vo, so this particle tunnels through 
the barrier, behavior that is mirrored in its transmission coefficient (see Fig. 8.18). 


it is denoted f(E\0,<p). The relationship of amplitude to probability is the familiar 
one, 

^(6, v >) = \me, v >)\ 2 . 

In one dimension, we have p(E) = f(E\ 6 = 0) and t(E ) = f{E\ 6 = n). 

To finish our look at tunnelling, here’s a historical note on the impact its discovery 
had on the developing field of quantum physics. Emilio Segre has discussed the im¬ 
portance of this discovery in his splendid book From Atoms to Quarks (Berkeley, Ca.: 
University of California Press, 1980). Some of you may be able to identify with Lord 
Rutherford in the following remark: 

George Gamow and Edward U. Condon with R. W. Gurney independently discovered 
the transparency of potential barriers and applied it to the explanation of the apparent 
paradoxes of nuclear alpha decay. This result deeply impressed Rutherford, who had 
been somewhat skeptical about a theory involving so much mathematics and so little 
intuition. 


8.7 BOUND STATES OF THE FINITE SQUARE WELL 


Having probed the mysteries of scattering states, we now turn to bound states. The bound- 
state counterpart to the extended continuum-state example of § 8.6 is the symmetric finite 
square well of Fig. 8.20b, 



r Vo 

-oo < to < -f 


V(x) = 

0 

~2 < X < J ■ 

(8.85) 


l Vo 

j < X < oo 



In this section and the next, we’ll solve for the eigenfunctions (and quantized energies) 
of this system. 


Sec. 8.7 Bound States of the Finite Square Well 319 


A significant difference between the bound- and continuum-state problems follows 
from the central contrasts between these two types of states: their boundary conditions 
[Eq. (8.7) versus Eq. (8.8)] and their allowed energies. A major difficulty in solving the 
TISE for bound states is that we don’t know the allowed, quantized energies in advance. 
We must find these values by solving for Hamiltonian eigenfunctions that obey the 
boundary conditions ^e{x) —* 0 as x —> ±oo. Only such solutions can be normalized, 

/ OO 

1>*e ( x )^e (x) dx = 1, (8.86) 

•OO 

and only normalized eigenfunctions yield a normalized wave function \p£(a;,£). 

Qualitative Deductions 

Rather than solve this problem by grinding out a “cookbook” implementation of the 
general procedure at the beginning of § 8.4,1 would like to show you some shortcuts— 
tricks of the trade that may dramatically reduce the algebraic complexity of this problem. 
Our first guideline for determining qualitative solutions to quantum problems is 


Rule 

Try to deduce as much as possible about the stationary-state eigenfunctions and energies by 
drawing analogies to states of a system you have already solved. 


The first cousin of the finite square well is the infinite square well (Chap. 7). 
(I strongly recommend that you stop reading now, go back, and review this example.) 
In Example 7.2, we showed that this potential supports an infinite number of bound 
stationary states, with energies [Eq. (7.49)] 

ir 2 h 2 

E " =n2 2^L* " = 1.2.3. (8.87) 

and eigenfunctions 29 



The first few spatial functions i/tn°°\x) are shown in Fig. 7.4, a glance at which 
reminds us that each eigenfunction (8.88) has definite parity ; i.e., each is either even or 
odd under inversion through the midpoint of the well. In this system, the parity of the 
Hamiltonian eigenfunctions mirrors the parity of the trigonometric functions: 



sin kx -> sin(— kx) = — sin kx odd 



X —► —X 

cos kx - > cos (—kx) = + cos kx even 

X—*— X 



29 I have introduced the label (oo) on the spatial functions and energies to distinguish them from the 
solutions for the finite well, which we’ll determine in this section. 


320 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




Another important property of the infinite-well eigenfunctions is that ij)n(x) has n - 1 
nodes, finite values of x at which = 0. Now let’s use these properties to sketch 

the bound-state eigenfunctions of the finite well (8.85). 

Here’s what we already know about these functions. In Example 8.2, we classified 
the regions of the finite square well for bound states (states with energy E < Vo). From 
the arguments of § 8.4, we expect the eigenfunctions in the CA region (Region 2) to be 
oscillatory and those in the CF regions (Regions 1 and 3) to be decaying exponentials. 
(Remember that in the latter regions we must apply asymptotic conditions to guard 
against exploding exponentials.) 

Consider the ground state, ipi(x). The ground state of the infinite well, a simple 
cosine function, appears in Fig. 8.20a. To draw its counterpart for the finite well, we 
must somehow distort this cosine function so as to obtain a continuous and smoothly- 
varying function that is oscillatory for -L/2 < x < L/2 and that decays exponentially 
for x < —L/2 and a; > L/2. 

We do so by letting the cosine function “relax” so that at the “walls” this function 
goes to a finite value, rather than to zero (see Fig. 8.20b). Because of this change, 
the wavelength of ipi(x) is slightly larger than that of ^[^(x). This increase in the 
wavelength allows the cosine function to “spill over” into the CF regions. One further 
change is necessary to preserve the normalization condition (8.86), which requires that 
the area under \iJje(x)\ 2 be equal to one: the amplitude of ipi{x) in the CA region is 
slightly smaller than the amplitude of ^[^(x) in this region. 



(a) |b) 


Figure 8.20 Sketches of the eigenfunctions for the ground states of (a) an infinite square 
well of width L, and (b) a finite square well of the same width and height Vo- 


Notice that this sketch of t/’i (x) preserves two crucial properties of the correspond¬ 
ing infinite-well function: its symmetry and its number of nodes. When we distort an 
eigenfunction of the infinite well to produce an eigenfunction of the symmetric finite 
well, we must take care to preserve these properties—because in the limit Vo —> oo any 
bound-state eigenfunction of the finite well must transform smoothly into the correspond¬ 
ing eigenfunction of the infinite well. 

What can we deduce about the ground-state energy of the finite well? Well, this 
energy is related to the de Broglie wavelength in Region 2 by 


h 2 k 2 4ir 2 fi 2 
2m 2mA 2 


(8.89) 


So an increase in A results in a decrease in E. That is, because the de Broglie wavelength 
of ipi (a:) in Region 2 is slightly larger than that of its infinite counterpart, E\ must be 
slightly smaller than E j 30 *. 


Sec. 8.7 Bound States of the Finite Square Well 321 



Question 8-23 

Sketch the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions for the first and second excited states of the finite 
square well. On an energy-level diagram like Fig. 7.3, locate (approximately) the energies 
of the first three stationary states, showing their proximity to the bound-state energies of the 
infinite well. 

This process of deducing qualitative information about complicated physical sys¬ 
tems is not magic. You can do it. The principles I have applied are simple and familiar: 

1. the uniqueness of iPe(x) for a bound-state of a one-dimensional potential; 

2. the normalization requirement (8.86); 

3. the fact that a symmetric potential implies eigenfunctions of definite parity. 

The latter property is so important that I’ll summarize as follows: 30 



Thus, as we saw in Chap. 7, the ground state eigenfunction of the infinite well is even, 
and the excited-state eigenfunctions alternate parity with increasing n. In Chap. 9 we’ll 
prove that this property is characteristic of all symmetric potentials : 


71 = 1 

2 

3 

4 ... 

parity = even 

odd 

even 

odd ... 


The moral—words to live by when solving problems—is 


Rule 

THINK BEFORE YOU DERIVE—and THINK SYMMETRY 


These principles aid us not only in our quest for qualitative understanding of 
quantum systems, but also in the quantitative solution of the TISE, as in the next example. 

Example 8.7. Solving the TISE for the Finite Square Well (with the Least Possible Work) 

Let’s return to the procedure of § 8.4. So far, we’ve identified and classified the regions of 
the finite square well, defined the necessary wave numbers and decay constants, and written 
down the pieces of the eigenfunction in the CA and CF regions (see Fig. 8.13). [Because of 
the parity condition, the piece of each eigenfunction in Region 2 will be a sine or a cosine 

30 Be wary of the quantum numbers we use to label Hamiltonian eigenfunctions. For most one¬ 
dimensional systems, it’s conventional to choose n = 1 to label the ground state. But for some problems, such 
as the simple harmonic oscillator of Chap. 9, we pick n = 0 to label the ground state. The point to remember 
is that the parity of a state is a basic property of its eigenfunction, not a consequence of the index we use to 
label it. 


322 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 






function; so it makes sense to choose the real trigonometric form for ^\x).] The next 
step is applying the continuity conditions at the region boundaries. 

To reduce the algebra involved in this step, let’s take into account the symmetry of 
the functions we’re trying to find. The parity of these functions enables us to separate the 
problem into two simpler problems, one for even-parity states and one for odd-parity states. 
That is, the general forms of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions are 31 


{ Be KT 
C cos kx 
Ae~ KX 


Tpn(x) 


Be KX 
D sin kx 
Ae~ KX 


-oo < x < —j 

— —< x < — 

2 - X - 2 

j <X < oo ( 8 . 90 ) 


for n = 1, 3, 5, ... 
(even parity) 


for n = 2, 4, 5, ... 
(odd parity) 


Question 8-24 

Suppose we were to use the form of iI>e\x) (8.28), in which the exponentials e ikx 
and e~ ,kx appear. Write down this form for the finite square well and show that the 
only linear combination of these exponentials that have the necessary parity are, in 
fact, coskx and sin kx. 



square well in the classically-forbidden regions. Note the symmetry of these 
pieces of even- and odd-parity states. 


Now let’s apply the continuity conditions (8.40) at the region boundaries, x = —L/2 
and x = L/2. We can use the power of parity to simplify this step dramatically by relating 
the piece of iJ>e(x) in the CF Region 1 to the piece in the other CF Region, 2. Look 
carefully at Fig. 8.21: if x is any point in Region 3, then the parity conditions (8.89) 
imply 


iJ>e\-x) = ±^4 3) (®)- j <x < oo 


(8.91) 


31 hi this section, I’ll write equations such as (8.90), which pertain to two cases, with the even-parity 
case on the left and the odd-parity case on the right. So if you wish, you can read along the left column first, 
then go back and read the right column. The index n will, as we’ll soon see, label the allowed (quantized) 
values of k and k. 


Sec. 8.7 Bound States of the Finite Square Well 323 





This condition constrains the values of the coefficients A and B in Eq. (8.90), for Eq. (8.91) 
can be satisfied only if B = ±A. So we can immediately eliminate one multiplicative 
constant from the Hamiltonian eigenfunction, leaving 


{ Ae KX 
C cos kx 
Ae~ KX 


{ Ae KX 
C sin kx 
-Ae~ KX 


-OO < X < —J 

-J <X < j ■ (8.92) 

J < X < OO 


I dropped D from (8.92), because we don’t need two coefficients (C and D ) in 
Region 2. The piece of iJ>e{x) in this region is either a cosine function (if the state has 
even parity) or a sine function (if it has odd parity). 

The simple reduction of Eq. (8.90) to Eq. (8.92) simplifies the ensuing algebra. Now 
we can determine iPe{x) by solving at most two simultaneous algebraic equations, rather 
than the four we’d have faced had we ignored parity. [The (arduous) solution of those four 
equations would have led us to B = ±A anyway. But by using parity arguments, we have 
deduced a conclusion that we would otherwise have had to derive.] Note carefully that this 
simplification does not apply to a potential that is not symmetric — e.g., to an asymmetric 
square well (V 3 ^ Vi). 

This success leads us to seek additional simplifications due to symmetry. Consider 
the points where we must impose continuity conditions, the region boundaries xj = — L/2 
and X 2 = L/2. These points are equidistant from the midpoint of the (symmetric) well, 
x = 0, so we can use the parity of the eigenfunction (8.92) to write 


W-t) = 


{ even parity 
odd parity 


(8.93) 



= ± Tx M x) 


L 

2 


{ odd parity 
even parity 


(8.94) 


So if we force ^e{x) and its first derivative to he continuous at one of the boundaries, then 
continuity at the other boundary follows automatically from Eqs. (8.93) and (8.94), and we 
need not impose the conditions at the second boundary. This wonderful property further 
reduces the number of equations we must solve! To convince yourself of the validity 
of this argument, examine Table 8 . 6 , where I’ve imposed continuity conditions for the 
even-parity states at both boundaries. Notice that two sets of equations in this table are 
identical. 

Now, onward to the continuity conditions. Let’s do the odd-parity eigenfunctions 
(8.92). Applying Eqs. (8.93) and (8.94) to these eigenfunctions, we get a pair of simultaneous 
algebraic equations : 


Csin | 

( 5 * 1 ) = -Ae-" L/ ' 2 

(8.95 a) 

Ck cos | 

( Li) = KAe “ L/2 . 

(8.95 b) 


\2 J 


The unknowns in these equations are A, C , and the energy E„, which is buried in the wave 
number and decay constant 


k = 



K =J^.(Vo-E tl ). 


(8.96) 


324 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



TABLE 8.6 CONTINUITY CONDITIONS FOR EVEN-PARITY STATES OF THE FINITE 
SQUARE WELL 


Continuity Conditions at a: = — y 



Ae~ KL f 2 = Ccos(JjfcL) 
k nAe~ KL f 2 = -fcCsin(-ifcL) 

Continuity Conditions at x = 


s > (t) = *e > (j) 

= stfto 

X 2 

Ceos = Ae~ KL ! 2 

X= L —CL - sin ^kLj = —Ane~ KL / 2 


Solutions to these equations exist only for certain discrete values of k and k — i.e., for 
quantized energies 32 

From Eqs. (8.95) we can easily derive a single equation that, when solved, will yield 
the quantized energies of the odd-parity states. To achieve this reduction for odd-parity 
states, we just eliminate the constants C and A, which are irrelevant to the energies, by 
dividing (8.95 b) by (8.95 a): 33 


(8.97) 

(even-parity states) (odd-parity states) 


K 

n , \ 

- = — cot 

-kL) 

k 

\2 V 


n = 2, 4, 6, ... 



n = 1, 3, 5, ... 


Question 8-25 

Using the continuity conditions in Table 8.6, derive the equation in (8.97) for the 
even-parity states. 


Equations (8.97) look quite different from the energy equations we’ve seen hereto¬ 
fore. The reason is that the allowed values of the energy are implicit in these equations. 
Mathematically speaking, Eqs. (8.97) are transcendental equations. The solution of such 
equations requires special tools, so I’ll defer this matter until the next section. In the mean¬ 
time, you can reassure yourself that they’re correct by examining them in limiting cases (see 
Pblm. 8.11). 


32 There is a sound mathematical reason why we must leave the energy unspecified when we solve the 
TISE for bound stationary states. The normalization requirement (8.86) imposes an additional equation that the 
pieces ipn(x) must satisfy, a condition not present for a continuum slate. Were we to treat the energy of the 
bound state as given, we would have more equations than unknowns, and could not solve Eqs. (8.95). For more 
on this point, see p. I03ff in Elementary Quantum Mechanics by P. Fong (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 
1960). 

33 An alternate way to solve for the bound-state energies of the finite (and infinite) square wells—a 
method that is based on a sophisticated use of operators (Chaps. 10 and 11)—is described in the article by S. 
Kais and R. D. Levine, Phys. Rev. A., 34, 4615 (1987). 


Sec. 8.7 Bound States of the Finite Square Well 325 






Aside: Still More Simplifications (the Logarithmic Derivative). If, as is 
often the case, we don’t need the full form of i})e{x), but rather only the 
equations for the bound-state energies, we can bypass most of the algebra in 
this example by transforming the continuity conditions (8.40) on ipEix) and 
its first derivative into a single condition on the logarithmic derivative. This 
quantity is defined as 

£(lM*)] = £ (IniM*)] = ^^(*). 

In terms of the logarithmic derivative, the continuity conditions (8.40) become 
the single equation 


$E~ l) ( x ) dx 




1 


^\x) ■ 




You can easily derive Eqs. (8.97) by applying this equation to the even- and 
odd-parity eigenfunctions. 


The last step in the solution of the TISE for the finite square well is to determine the 
eigenfunction. This entails using Eqs. (8.95) and (8.96) to relate the constants A and C , 
viz.. 


A = Ce KL/2 cos (^kL^j A = 

(even-parity states) 

These relations reduce the eigenfunctions (8.92) to 


-Ce KL/2 s\n(^kL) 
(odd-parity states) 


ipn (a;) 


V'h (a-') 


Ceos e* L/2 J e 

C cos kx 

C cos ^kLj e KL/f2 j e 

- Csin Q&l) e* L/2 ] 
C sin kx 

Csin {^kLj e* L/2 e 


KX 


— KX 


for n = 1,3,5,... 
(even parity) 


for n = 2,4,5,... 
(odd parity) 


(8.98) 


(8.99) 


One lone constant, C, remains undetermined. This is the normalization constant 
for these eigenfunctions, and we could determine its value by imposing the normalization 
condition. But, because of the complexity of the finite-well eigenfunctions, we must do so 
by numerical integration. Since the result adds nothing to our understanding of the physics 
of the stationary states of this system, I won’t bother. 

Question 8-26 

Some authors choose the zero of energy at the top of the finite square well rather than 
at the bottom, and let —Vo denote the well depth. What changes would this choice 
bring about in the definitions of the wave number and decay constant (8.96) for this 
problem? How—if at all—would this choice change Eqs. (8.97) for the energies and 
(8.99) for the spatial functions? Can you see an advantage to this choice over the 
one I have made in this section? 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



What to Do if V(x) Isn’t Symmetric 


Nature is not always so accommodating as in this example: not all potentials are sym¬ 
metric. Suppose we’re confronted with the asymmetric square well 

1 V\ —oo < x <x\ 

0 x\ < x < x 2 . (8.100) 

V 3 x 2 < x < 00 

In this problem, few of the wonderful simplifications we invoked for the symmetric case 
apply. Since Vj / V^, the decay constants in Regions 1 and 3 are not equal («i ^ « 3 ), 
the eigenfunctions tj) n (x) do not have definite parity, and the coefficients of ^\ x ) and 
tPe\x) are not equal [A( 3 ) ^ B^]. 

So we know considerably less (in advance) about the eigenfunctions of the asym¬ 
metric well than we knew about those of the symmetric well. We can, however, write 
down the form 

( B^ l) e KlX -00 < x < xi 

cos k 2 x + sin k 2 x x\ < x < x 2 . ( 8 . 101 ) 

^(3) e -K 3 a; X 2 < X < OO 

To determine the coefficients in Eq. (8.101) we must apply continuity conditions at both 
region boundaries, £1 and x 2 . Doing so is algebraically messier than the example we 
have walked through here, but it’s valuable practice with our new problem-solving tools. 
If you’re game, try Pblm. 8 . 6 . 

8.8 THE FINITE SQUARE WELL: THE ANSWERS 

We could use a number of strategies to conquer the transcendental equations for the 
finite square well, (8.97): graphical, iterative, and numerical (e.g., via power-series). In 
this section I’ll sketch two of these approaches: graphical solution , which highlights 
important mathematical features of these equations and which is useful if you can’t get 
at a hand calculator or a computer, and iterative solution , which is quite accurate and 
easily programmable . 34 

Rewriting the Equations 

To illuminate the role of the energy in the transcendental equations (8.97), let’s write 
them in terms of the quantized values E n . Actually, I want to use not E u , but rather the 
binding energy e„. Crudely speaking, the binding energy of the n th bound stationary 
state measures how far E„ is from the top of the well. For E = 0 at the bottom of the 
well, the binding energy is defined as e„ = Vo - E u . Physically, the binding energy is 
a measure of how “tightly bound” the particle is—the greater the binding energy, the 
deeper in the well is the energy eigenvalue. (You may know the binding energy from 
atomic physics, where it’s often called the ionization potential.) In practical terms, the 

31 Although I don’t advise skipping this section, you could omit one of these two methods. Graphical 
solution of transcendental equations is treated first; iterative solution begins with the subsection entitled “A 
Transcendental Iteration.” 


Sec. 8.8 The Finite Square Well: The Answers 327 



binding energy is the amount of energy you would have to supply to the particle to 
remove it from the well (with zero kinetic energy). 

With this definition and Eqs. (8.96) for the wave number and decay constant, we 
can rewrite the transcendental equations (8.97) as 



n = 1, 3, 5, ... 
(even-parity states) 


( 8 . 102 ) 



n = 2, 4, 6, ... 
(odd-parity states) 


Only values of e„ that satisfy one of these equations correspond to an eigenvalue E n 
that yields an eigenfunction that is normalizable. 

Question 8-27 

Prove from the mathematical form of Eqs. (8.102) that the only allowed values of e„ occur 
in the interval 0 < e„ < Vo. Discuss briefly the nature of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions 
for E > Vo. 


Reducing Clutter in the Transcendental Equations 


To minimize the chance that we’ll make algebraic blunders while solving these equations, 
we should write them in terms of two intermediate quantities: a potential-strength 
parameter, 35 


c = 



(8.103a) 


and the argument of the trigonometric functions (tangent and co-tangent), 


_ L 2 mL 2 

T) = \/C 2 -—or-e 


2 c »* 


2 h 

With these quantities, the transcendental equations (8.102) become 


(8.1036) 


tan 7} = — -— 


= \U- 1 -1 
V) 


cot q = — - 


V 


= 1 -1 
7i) 


TL — 1, 3, . . . 

(even-parity states) 


n = 2,4,6 ,... 
(odd-parity states) 


(8.104) 


35 If we increase Vq or L, deepening or widening ihe well and hence increasing its strength, we increase 
C- That’s why this quantity is called a potential strength parameter. 


328 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



We’ll label the roots of these equations, the values of 77 that solve them, by the 
index n that labels the even- and odd-parity eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian, e.g., 77 ,,. 

Question 8-28 

Derive Eqs. (8.104). 


Question 8-29 

Derive the following useful relationship between the roots of Eqs. (8.104) and the binding 
energies e„: 





t/ 2h2 2 


(8.105) 


Transcendental Curves 


Each of Eqs. (8.104) has the standard form of a transcendental equation (in the variable 
77 ): an equality between two functions of the variable, where at least one of the functions 
is a trigonometric, hyperbolic, exponential, or logarithmic function: 


Even-Parity Roots 


h(v) = /2W 

fiiv) = tan 77 / 2 (t?) = 



(8.106a) 

(8.106/;) 


Odd-Parity Roots 


fail) = f*(v) 

/ 3 (77)=COt 77 /4 (77) = — 



(8.106c) 

(8.106c/) 


Here are some other transcendental equations you may have encountered in your studies: 


sin 77 = 77 , (8.107a) 

ln77 = e -,, . (8.107/7) 

Notice that each transcendental equation defines two curves. So the roots of such an 
equation are the points where these curves intersect. This way of looking at a tran¬ 
scendental equation is the key to the simplest (though least accurate) solution technique: 
graphical solution. Just graph each curve and look for the points of intersection. 

A graphical solution of the even- and odd-parity equations (8.104) for the finite 
square well is shown in Fig. 8.22. I’ve chosen the potential strength parameter £ to 
produce several bound states, the first five of which are circled and labeled: three of 
these states are even, the other two are odd. [In Example 8.8 we’ll look in more detail 
at the solution of Eqs. (8.104); at this point I just want you to get the general idea.] 
Notice that the principal branches of /1 ( 77 ) = tan 77 and / 3 (^) = cot 77 are repeated for 
all values of 77 . One even root comes from each branch of the tangent function: 

7T 7T 7T 3?r 3?r 57T , /o i no n 

— < 77 < —, — < 77 < —, — < 77 < — branches of tan 77 (8.108a) 

2 2 2 2 2 2 


Sec. 8.8 The Finite Square Well: The Answers 329 



tan t} 



(a) Even parity 



(b) Odd parity 


Figure 8.22 Graphical solution of 
Eqs. (8.106) for three even- and two odd- 
parity states of a finite square well. The 
roots of these equations are the (circled) 
points of intersection of the two sets of 
curves. [Note that / 2 O/) 311(1 /-if 1 /) are 
defined only up to q = that’s why these 
curves define only a finite number of roots.) 
[Adapted from An Introduction to Quantum 
Physics by A. P. French and E. F. Taylor 
(New York: Norton, 1978).] 


And one odd root comes from each branch of the co-tangent function: 36 

0 < 77 < 7 r, 7 r < 77 < 27T, 27T < 7 / < 37t branches of cot rj (8.108 b) 


Example 8.8. A Transcendental Example 

Consider an electron of mass m e in a bound stationary state of a hydrogen atom. Suppose 
the range of the Coulomb potential binding the electron is (very roughly) la 0 - We’ll model 
this system by a finite square well of width L = lao and depth Vo = 49n 2 h 2 /(8mL 2 ). 
Like most atomic physicists, we’ll solve this problem in atomic units: 37 

36 Actually, only part of each branch contributes a root of each parity. For example, because / 2 O/) is 
a positive function, the even-parity roots show up in the intervals 0 < q < n/2, n < q < 37r/2, etc,— i.e ., 
in the first and third quadrants of the unit circle. Similarly, the odd-parity roots show up in the second and 
fourth quadrants. 

37 If you’re unfamiliar with atomic units, see Appendix F. 


330 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



h = m e = flo = 1 


Atomic Units. 


(8.109) 


In these units, the (dimensionless) potential strength parameter is C = 5.498 and the depth 
of the well is Vo = 60.451£y,. (The atomic unit of energy is the hartree, written Eh\ 
1 E h = 27.201 eV.) 

This potential supports four bound states, two of even parity and two of odd parity. 
Graphical solution of Eqs. (8.106) yields the roots t/„ shown in Table 8.7. Also shown in this 
table are the binding energies e n and energy eigenvalues E n , and the latter are compared to 
the bound-state energies for an infinite square well of the same width, Ei° o) = n 2 7 t 2 /2 Eh . 


TABLE 8.7 BOUND-STATE ENERGIES FOR A FINITE 
SQUARE WELL. 


_ 49tt 2 
8 


n 

Vn 

e n {Eh) 

En {E h ) 

eS ” 1 (£*) 

1 (e) 

1.32 

56.97 

3.48 

4.93 

2(o) 

2.64 

46.51 

13.94 

19.74 

3(e) 

3.92 

29.72 

30.73 

44.41 

4(o) 

5.10 

8.43 

52.02 

78.96 


The Hamiltonian eigenfunctions obtained by inserting the finite-well energies E n into 
Eqs. (8.96) and normalizing the resulting functions appear in Fig. 8.23. Finally, Table 8.8 
contains, for each bound state, the wave number, decay constant, characteristic length, and 
wave length (in Region 2). 


TABLE 8.8 WAVE NUMBERS, ETC., FOR A FINITE 
SQUARE WELL (IN ATOMIC UNITS). 




Vo 

_ 49tt 2 

8 



n 

k» 

An 

\(oe) 

''ii 

Kil 


1 

2.64 

2.38 

2.00 

10.67 

0.09 

2 

5.28 

1.19 

1.00 

9.64 

0.10 

3 

7.84 

0.80 

0.66 

7.71 

0.13 

4 

10.20 

0.62 

0.50 

4.11 

0.24 


Many of the features in these figures and tables are found in real microscopic systems. 

All of these features confonn to our qualitative predictions: 

1. the stationary-state energies are not equally spaced; rather, the spacing between adja¬ 
cent bound-state energies increases with n; 

2. the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions have definite, alternating parity (c/., the qualitative 
sketch of the ground-state eigenfunction in Fig. 8.20); 

3. the de Broglie wavelength in the CA region is slightly larger than that of the infinite 
well, which allows for “spillage” into the CF regions; 


Sec. 8.8 The Finite Square Well: The Answers 331 





>< 

■ 

^\l\ 






- tnl*) 

-^*(x)^„{x) 


Figure 8.23 Hamiltonian eigenfunctions 
i !> n {x) (solid curves) and the corresponding 
probability densities |^„(.t)| 2 (dashed 
curves) for the first four stationary bound 
states of a finite square well. (Adapted 
from An Introduction to Quantum Physics 
by A. P. French and E. F. Taylor (New 
York: Norton, 1978).] 


4. Ihe characteristic length 1 /«„ increases with n, reflecting increased penetration of 
weakly-bound eigenfunctions into the forbidden zone. 


Variation of the Potential Strength 

Equation (8.105) shows the dependence of the binding energies e„ on the depth and width 
of the potential well. But it may surprise you to learn that these quantities also control 
the number of bound stationary states that the well supports. To illustrate this point, 
Fig. 8.24 shows the graphical solution of the even-parity equation for three different 
values of the well depth V 0 . As V 0 (and hence 0 changes, the values 7?„ at which the 
curves (8.106) cross change and hence so do the eigenvalues E n . From this figure, we 
deduce the following rule (see also Pblm. 8.2): 

{ increase number of bound stationary states 

( 8 . 110 ) 

increase binding energy of each state 

To illustrate this effect quantitatively, I repeated the calculations of Example 8.8 
for a slightly weaker square well: instead of the values in that example, £ = 7n/4 and 
Vo = 497 t 2 /8, I used ( = 4 and Vo = 32. This well supports three bound stationary 
states, with binding energies (in atomic units) 


332 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



Figure 8.24 Solution of the energy equations of the finite square well for even-parity 
states. Three wells are considered, of varying heights as indicated. Note that both the 
number of bound stationary states and the energies of these states are affected by the 
strength of the well. [Adapted from An Introduction to Quantum Physics by A. P. French 
and E. F. Taylor (New York: Norton, 1978).] 

Ci = 28.86 Ei, even parity 

e 2 = 19.74 E h odd parity (8.111) 

€ 3 = 6.14 Ei, even parity 

Compare these energies with those of the stronger well (Table 8 . 8 ). The weaker well 
supports one fewer bound state, and these states are less tightly hound than the three 
lowest states of the stronger well. 

Figure 8.25 summarizes what we’ve learned about the transcendental energy equa¬ 
tions for a finite square well. To make the curves in this figure easier to draw (and 
understand), I have graphed them in the equivalent form 38 

77 tan 77 = \/C 2 - V 2 —77 cot 77 = \f(? — t} 2 

n = 1, 3, 5, ... n = 2, 4, 6 . (8.112) 

(even-parity states) (odd-parity states) 

[Notice that the right-hand side of each of Eqs. (8.112) is a simple quarter of a circle of 
radius (.] In Fig. 8.25, you’ll find graphs of Eqs. (8.112) for several potential wells (/>., 
for several values of the potential strength parameter Q. Study this figure very carefully; 
it contains a great deal of useful information. 

Question 8-30 

Show that the transcendental equations (8.104) can be written in the alternate forms 


38 To become a Master of Square Wells, you must be able to massage the energy equations into a variety 
of forms, so that you can accommodate various kinds of potentials. For extremely useful advice on graphical 
solution of transcendental equations, see P. H. Pitkanen, Amer.Jour. Phys. 23, 111 (1955). By the way, you 
can buy a software package for an IBM PC that will graphically solve transcendental equations for you. It is 
called MATH UTILITIES and is available from Bridge Software, P. O. Box 118, New Town Beach, Boston, 
MA 02258. 


Sec. 8.8 The Finite Square Well: The Answers 333 




Figure 8.25 Graphical solution of the transcendental equations (8.112) of the finite 
square well. Even- and odd-parity states are included for several different potential 
strength parameters Q. [Adapted from Quantum Mechanics by R. G. Winter, 2nd ed. 
(Davis, Calif.: Faculty Publishing, 1986).] 


cos 1 } — 
sm rj = ±- 


even parity 
odd parity. 


(8.113«) 
(8.113 b) 


You should always consider using these forms when solving the energy equations graphically; 
Eqs. (8.113) are particularly easy to plot, because their right-hand sides are just straight lines 
of slope l/£. 


Question 8-31 

In the above discussion, I varied the strength of the well by changing Vo. What would 
happen to the bound-state energies of, say, the well in Example 8.7 had I left Vo alone and, 
instead, increased (or decreased) L? What would happen to the number of bound states 
supported by this well? 


Question 8-32 

Use the figures and transcendental equations of this section to prove that 

c„ -> 0. (8.114) 

< — (»i-1)jt/-2 

334 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 









Interpret this result physically: what does it imply about the effect on a particle in the well 
when the depth of the potential is varied according to the limit? 


A Transcendental Iteration 


Graphical solution of the transcendental energy equations for the finite square well yields 
a wealth of physical insights. But it is a time-consuming and not especially accurate 
method—at best, if you are an uncommonly good grapher, you may be able to determine 
accurate to a couple of decimal places. To calculate more accurate binding energies, 
you must resort to numerical methods, such as the iterative technique to be presented 
here . 39 

The idea behind the iterative solution of a transcendental equation is simplicity it¬ 
self: construct a series of approximate solutions, called iterates, by repeated substitution 
into the equation for the root. Our starting point is the generic fonn (8.106) for a tran¬ 
scendental equation, /i( 77 ) = /^(t/). To prepare such an equation for iterative solution, 
we rewrite it (yet again) as 


V = F(V)- (8.115) 

In so doing, we must carefully choose the function F{rj) to ensure that (if possible) our 
series of approximate solutions converges. (I’ll show you how to do this below.) For 
example, Eq. (8.107a) is already in the form Eq. (8.115), 77 = sin 77 , and Eq. (8.107/?) 
can easily be put into this form: 77 = e e \ 

Once we have chosen we develop a series of approximate solutions to 

(8.115), r/ (0) , 77 (1) , 77 (2) , ... according to the simple prescription in Table 8.9. We 
calculate the i th iterate 77 ^ from the (i - l) th iterate by inserting the latter into the 
right-hand side of Eq. (8.115), viz., 

rj {i) = F (8.116) 

Repeating this procedure, we ultimately arrive at an approximate (but very accurate) 
root rj n of the transcendental equation rj = F(rj) —if, that is, the sequence of iterates 
{^(°) | ^( 1 ) }? ?( 2 ) j ... | converges, i.e., 

rj™ - -* Tj n = F {rj n ) convergence of iterates (8.117) 


Aside: On Accuracy of an Iterative Solution. Assuming that your sequence does 
converge, the number of iterates you must calculate to attain a root of a desired 
accuracy (say, 12 decimal places) depends on the accuracy of your initial guess ?/ 0) . 
So this guess should not be made in a cavalier fashion. (Indeed, whether or not your 
sequence of iterates converges at all may depend on how shrewd your initial guess 
is.) The moral is: make your initial guess an informed one: think carefully about the 
form of the transcendental equation you want to solve, perhaps evaluating it in one 
or more appropriate limiting cases to gain insight. Don’t worry if you have to try 
several guesses to get smooth, rapid convergence (see Example 8.9). 


39 In this section I have drawn heavily on the valuable presentations by K. S. Kranc, Amer. Jour. Phys. 
50, 521 (1982) and by R. D. Murphy and J. M. Phillips, ibid., 44, 574 (1976). See also J. P. McKelvey, Amer. 
Jour. Phys. 43, 331 (1975), J. M. Phillips and R. D. Murphy, ibid., 44, 487 (1976), and J. A. Ball, ibid., 44 
488 (1976). 


Sec. 8.8 The Finite Square Well: The Answers 335 



TABLE 8.9 ITERATIVE SOLUTION OF 

r) = F(/,). 


Guess zeroth iterate 


Calculate first iterate = F(?/ 0 ^) 


Calculate second iterate 


Continue to convergence, Eq. (8.117) 


Question 8-33 

Try the procedure in Table 8.9 on the simple equation 77 = sin 77 . Your iterates will converge 
fairly quickly to a root no matter what you choose for 77 (0) . 


This book is not the place for a discourse on the convergence of iterative solutions 
to transcendental equations. But you need to know a bit about this topic, so you can 
intelligently apply this method to the transcendental equations of quantum physics. The 
convergence (or lack of same) of Eq. (8.115) depends on the first derivative of F(rj), 
according to the following rule: 40 


< 1 . (8.118) 

n=n>x 

This condition shows why the choice of ^( 77 ) is critical. For example, the iterative 
method will fail for the simple equation 77 = sin 77 if we write this equation as 77 = sin - 1 77 , 
for this form violates Eq. (8.118). 

Question 8-34 

Show that of the following equivalent forms of the even-parity equation, 


the sequence (8.116) converges if 




40 Two types of convergence are possible: If this derivative is negative, successive iterates will oscillate 
about a root 7j„; if it is positive (and less than 1), successive iterates will converge monotonically to a root. 


336 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




1} — cotrjy/^ 2 — 7) 2 

(8.119a) 

V — tan -1 \ -1 

(8.119/?) 

V V 7 /; 


rj = \/C 2 — V 2 tan 2 V 

(8.119c) 


only (8.119/?) satisfies the condition (8.118). Write down the corresponding equation for the 
odd-parity roots. 

Example 8.9. Iterating Our Way to the Roots of the Finite Square Well 

To illustrate the iterative method of solution, let’s consider (one last time) the finite square 
well of Example 8 . 8 . This well supports Nb = 4 bound states; so we expect to find two 
roots of each parity (one from each quadrant of the unit circle). This knowledge guides our 
initial guesses for each root . 41 

I programmed Eqs. (8.119) on my trusty HP-25 hand calculator and obtained the roots 
in Table 8.10 (converged to the number of decimal points shown). For comparison, I have 
included in this table the results of graphical solution of the same problem (Example 8 . 8). 42 


TABLE 8.10 ACCURATE BOUND-STATE ENERGIES FOR A 
FINITE SQUARE WELL. 


49tT 2 

Vo- — 

n • 

7,(0) 

i] (converged) 

r/„ from Table 8.7 

1 (e) 

7t/4 

1.327016 

1.32 

2(o) 

37t/4 

2.640594 

2.64 

3(e) 

57t/4 

3.918889 

3.92 

4(o) 

7tt/4 - 0.001 

6.096720 

5.10 


8.9 FINAL THOUGHTS — AND AN APPLICATION 

You can apply the procedure we used in this chapter to solve the TISE for piecewise- 
constant potentials to a wide range of problems. The strategy of approximating a potential 
near points where it varies rapidly by a discontinuous “jump” greatly simplifies the 
solution of many a TISE, and is widely used in research applications. 

And even if we can’t invoke this approximation, we may be able to use the 
problem-solving techniques of this chapter. For example, a powerful method for studying 
continuum states of atoms, molecules, and nuclei—called the “R-matrix method” (see 

4 Unless you are using a very sophisticated hand calculator or a computer, your numerical device will 
probably return arctangents in the principal branch of this function, so you will have to shift each root into the 
appropriate branch. This is easy enough, of course: just add the appropriate multiple of tt [see Eqs. (8.108)]. 

42 Until you work through this example yourself (which you really should do), you won’t understand 
my choice of the initial guess for the fourth root. When I tried a point in the middle of the appropriate branch, 
rjW = 77r/4, I found that convergence was very slow and erratic. So I altered slightly my first guess; the 
choice in Table 8.10 led speedily to the converged root. Numerical methods are like guitars: you have to fool 
with them a bit to get them to produce what you want. 


Sec. 8.9 Final Thoughts — and an Application 337 




Pblm. 8.13)—is based on partitioning space into two regions and enforcing continuity (of 
the logarithmic derivative) at the boundary between the regions. This method is similar 
in spirit to our solution of the barrier problem in § 8.6. 

Another rather sophisticated method for dealing with continuous potentials is the 
“WKB approximation.” Like the approach used in this chapter, the WKB method entails 
constructing pieces of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction in CA and CF regions of the po¬ 
tential. But hooking these pieces together is rather complicated, for it requires the exact 
solution of the TISE at points very near the boundaries between adjacent CA and CF 
regions. The WKB method is particularly useful for calculating transmission coefficients 
through continuous barriers. 43 

Although we’ve spent a lot of time implementing the problem-solving procedure 
in § 8.4, the heart of this chapter is § 8.2 (on the physics of bound and continuum states) 
and § 8.3 and 8.5 (on the interpretation of continuum stationary states). The summaries 
in Tables 8.11 and 8.12 should help you to focus on the essentials of this chapter. 


TABLE 8.11 BOUND AND CONTINUUM STATES FOR A PIECEWISE-CONSTANT 
POTENTIAL. 



Bound States 

Continuum States 

iPe( x ) as x —» ±oo 

impose ^e(x) —* 0 

*1>e( x ) oscillatory (finite) 

energies 

only certain discrete E„ 

any value of E OK 

normalization 

ensure J 0 ^ ^(x)^>£:(x) = 1 

“normalize” to fit physics 

to determine: 

E n and ?/>„(x) 

probabilities R{E) & T{E) 

Piecewise Constant V (x) 

solution in CA region 

oscillatory 

oscillatory 

solution in CF region 

decaying (exp.) 

decaying (exp.) 

first region 

classically forbidden 

classically allowed 

last region 

classically forbidden 

classically allowed 


Quantum-Well Heterostructures 

Before leaving square wells, I want to introduce you to an amazing beast: the quantum- 
well heterostructure. This creature is a man-made, ultra-thin layer of crystalline matter, 


‘ ,3 The initials stand for the last names of the inventors of this method, G. Wentzel, H. Kramers, and 
L. Brillouin. The WKB method straddles the nebulous line between undergraduate and graduate quantum 
mechanics and, with some regret, I have decided to leave it out of this book. You can read about it in most 
graduate and a few undergraduate texts; I particularly like the introduction in § 7.10 of Introductory Quantum 
Mechanics by R. A. Liboff (San Francisco: Holden-Day, Inc., 1980) and, at a more advanced level, the 
treatment in § 16.2 of Principles of Quantum Mechanics by R. Shankar (New York: Plenum, 1980). A clever 
alternative to the WKB method is the path integral approach, which was developed by Richard Feynman 
and which is explicated in the text Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals by R. Feynman and A. Hibbs (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1965). To see how to apply this method to the tunnelling problem in § 8.6, see B. R. 
Holstein and A. R. Swift, Amer. Jour. Phys. 50, 833 (1982). 


338 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




TABLE 8.12 PIECES OF EIGENFUNCTIONS IN CA AND 
CF REGIONS. (FOR V = 0 AT THE BOTTOM OF THE 
LOWEST WELL) 


Classically Allowed 

Classically Forbidden 

E>V q 

E< V q 

-«*£*(•> 

k q = i/2m(£ - v q )/h 2 

Ae'kq* -j- Be~ lk< > x 

C cos k q x + D sin k q x 

n q = y/2m(V q - E)/h 2 
Ae~ K i x + Be*<> x 

C cosh K q x + D sinh n q x 


with especially tailored electronic properties, that one can grow in a laboratory. They play 
an important role in the design of a variety of high-technology semiconductor devices, 
and you may study them someday in a solid-state physics course. 

One can create very accurate models of quantum-well heterostructures using sym¬ 
metric finite square wells. An example of a quantum-well heterostructure is shown in 
Fig. 8.26a, which shows a layer of gallium arsenide (GaAs) roughly 200 A thick sand¬ 
wiched between two thicker layers of aluminum gallium arsenide. (For reasons that need 
not concern us, these are labelled Al x Ga X - x As.) A bound electron in the layer of GaAs 
is free to move in three dimensions. And its motion in the plane of the sample , which 
I’ll denote the yz plane, is unconstrained. So the dependence of the wave function of 
the electron on y and z is (to a good approximation) that of a free particle. 



(b) 



Figure 8.26 (a) A schematic of a quantum-well heterostructure, (b) The potential well 
experienced by an electron in the quantum-well heterostructure of (a). [After Fig. I of 
R. M. Kolbas and N. Holonyak, Jr., Amer.Jour. Phys. 52, 431 (1984).] 


But the potential energy perpendicular to this plane produces a symmetric finite 
square well —typically of depth ~ 0.4 eV. So the x dependence of the electron’s state 
function is given by one of the eigenfunctions in (8.99). Knowing the energies of the 
bound stationary states of this well, physicists can explain observations such as optical 
emission or luminescence spectra from a quantum-well heterostructure. 44 

44 I don’t have space here to do justice to these fascinating critters. For more, see R. M. Kolbas and N. 
Holonyak, Jr., Amer.Jour. Phys. 52, 431 (1984) and the chapter “Artificial Structures” in Solid Stale Physics 
by Gerald Burns (New York: Academic Press, 1985). 


Sec. 8.9 Final Thoughts — and an Application 339 




So don’t let anyone tell you that square wells are useful only to students of under¬ 
graduate quantum physics. 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 
Numerical Solution of the TISE 

In § 8.8 I showed you two ways to solve transcendental equations: graphical and iterative. 
If the former is inaccurate and the latter doesn’t converge, or if you want accurate 
eigenfunctions as well as the bound-state energies, you’ll probably want to consider 
numerical solution of the TISE. This is a vast subject, full of powerful methods and lots 
of pitfalls. A good place to start learning about it—particularly if you have access to a 
personal computer—is 

1. Killingbeck, J. P., Microcomputer Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed. (Boston: Adam Hilger Ltd., 
1983). 

2. Merrill, J. R., Using Computers in Physics (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1976). Chap 12 
of this book contains a nice discussion of applications of numerical methods to quantum 
physics. 

The clearest discussion I’ve read of the application of numerical methods for solving 
differential equations to quantum problems is Appendix G of 

3. Eisberg, R., and R. Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei, and 
Particles (New York: Wiley, 1985). Like almost every discussion in this admirable book, 
this appendix is clear and filled with examples. It even includes a computer program. 

Finally, you’ll find a clever alternative method for calculating bound-state energies of a 
general piecewise-constant potential in the article by S. A. Shakir in Amer. Jour. Phys. 
52, 845 (1984). 

EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


Van Helsing: “We’ll investigate the matter 
scientifically, without prejudice 
and without superstition.” 

Lucy Harker: “Enough of your science! 

I know what I have to do.” 

—Nosferatu the Vampyre 
by Werner Herzog 


Exercises 

8.1 Mysterious Transmissions__ _ _____ 

In § 8 . 6 , we considered at length continuum states of a barrier potential for energies less 
than the barrier height, E < Vo. In Question 8.19, I asked you to derive Eq. (8.84) for the 
transmission coefficient for a state with E > Vo- 

This equation shows that a particle incident from the left may be transmitted past the 
barrier or reflected back into Region 1, i.e., T(E) < 1 and R(E) < 1. But, as shown 
in Fig. 8.18a, at certain discrete energies the particle will definitely be transmitted—for at 


340 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



these “resonance energies” T(E) = 1. Let’s label the resonance energies by an index, n, as 
E n ,n= 1,2,_We’ll let c„ denote their distance from the top of the well: e„ = E„ — Vo. 

[a] Derive an expression for the resonance energies e„ in terms of the barrier width L, the 
index n, and fundamental constants. 

[b] Let A 2 denote the de Broglie wavelength of the particle in the region [-L/2 < x < L/2). 
If a transmission resonance occurs at an incident energy E n , how must the barrier width 
L be related to the wavelength A 2 for a particle with that energy? 

[c] Are there transmission resonances for energies E < Vo? Why or why not? 

[d] Sketch the transmission coefficient T(E) as a function of energy for values of E from 
E = 0 to some value larger than the third resonance energy, E > E3. On your sketch, 
show the location of Vo in relation to the resonance energies. 

[e] Sketch the Hamiltonian eigenfunction for the lowest-energy resonance, 

[f] In an experiment, an electron beam of current 3 nanoamperes and energy E is incident 
on a barrier of height Vo = 4eV. As E is increased from zero, the first observed 
transmission resonance occurs at e\ = 2.35 eV. Calculate the width L of the barrier, 
expressing your result in angstroms. 

8.2 One-Dimensional Scattering in the Lab 

Muons are particles of charge q = -1.602 x 10 -19 C. The mass of a muon, m tl , is roughly 
1/9 that of a proton. Suppose a source emits a monoenergetic beam of muons in the direction 
of increasing x towards a target located at x = 0. 

In this problem, we do not know the potential energy of interaction between the target 
and the projectile. Indeed, all we know is that this potential is constant in the source and 
detector regions. Far to the right of the target, there is a detector that measures a final current 

-/final- 

la] In one experiment carried out using this apparatus, the energy of the muons in the incident 
beam is E mc = 10.0 eV and the particle density in the incident beam is 4000 muons per 
meter. The detector measures a current /fi„ a i = 2.51 x 10 -11 C-sec -1 . Calculate the 
probability that a muon in the incident beam will be reflected by its encounter with the 
target, expressing your result in counts per second. 

[b] Suppose we modify the detector so that it can also measure the kinetic energy 7fi lia i of 
the muons it detects. Repeating the experiment of part [a], we find the same final current, 
and the final kinetic energy of Tfi na | = 6.0 eV. Write down the explicit form of the pure 
momentum function 4/ p (x , t) that approximately represents the state of particles in the 
transmitted beam — i.e., determine the values of all constants, such as wavenumber and 
frequency, that appear in this function. 

8.3 Stellar Quantum Physics 

The energy of most stars results from the fusion of hydrogen nuclei to form helium nuclei. 
This notion was first proposed in 1920 by Eddington and was promptly rejected by his peers 
on the following grounds. At temperatures typical of the interior of stars, virtually none of the 
hydrogen nuclei have enough kinetic energy to overcome their mutual electrostatic repulsion 
and get close enough together to undergo a fusion reaction. But fusion does occur in stars. 
Explain why. 

8.4 Quantum Mechanics of the Step Potential 

A beam of electrons of wavelength 1.5833 A is incident from the left on the step potential 


— r 0 

x < 0 

V (x) = { 


\ lOOeV 

x > 0 


The flux in the incident beam is 4.5941 x 10 12 electrons/sec. 

[a] Write down an explicit expression for the time-dependent pure momentum function that 
approximately represents the incident beam, fully evaluating all constants. 


Exercises and Problems 341 



[b] Derive an explicit expression for the spatial part of the transmitted wave, i.e., for iPe(x) 
for x > 0 , again evaluating all constants. 

[c] From the definition of the probability current density and your answer to part [b], evaluate 
the transmitted current. 

[d] What can you conclude from your answer to part [c] concerning the value of the trans¬ 
mission coefficient at this energy? 

[e] Evaluate the position probability density at x = 3 A. 

[f] Explain carefully why your answers to parts [d] and [e] are not mutually contradictory. 

8.5 A Step-Down Scattering Problem 

A beam of electrons with number density of 1 x 10 15 electrons/m is incident from the left 

on the step potential energy 


V(x) = 


0 x < 0 
-Vo x > 0 


(The constant Vo is positive, so this is a “down step” rather than an “up step” like the potential 

in Fig. 8.12.) 

[a] Write down the form of the spatial function ^\x) in each region of this potential, 
defining all wavenumbers and/or decay constants. Don’t forget to impose asymptotic 
conditions for x —> ±oo. 

[b] Obtain expressions for the transmission and reflection coefficients for this potential, 
expressing your results in terms of the quantities you introduced in part [a]. (This is not 
hard, because you don’t have to derive these expressions from scratch. Instead, try to 
relate this problem to one you have already solved.) 

[c] Evaluate T(E) and R{E) for an incident beam of kinetic energy 100 eV and a step of 
magnitude (Vo) 50 eV. Check your answer by verifying that probability is conserved 
[c.f., Example 8 . 6 ]. 

[d] Evaluate the incident and transmitted fluxes for the conditions of part [c]. Be sure to 
show units. 

[e] Sketch ^e(:e), being careful to clearly show any differences in the nature of the spatial 
function or in its amplitude or wavelength between the regions. 

8.6 Continuum States of the Finite Square Well 

A beam of particles of mass m is incident from the left on the potential well in Fig. 8.13. 

Suppose that the energy of the particles is greater than the height of the walls, i.e., E > Vo. 

[a] Write down the TISE and its general solution in each region, defining appropriate 
wavenumbers and arbitrary constants as needed. If you can set one or more of these 
arbitrary constants to zero at this point, do so and explain why. 

[b] Evaluate the reflected and transmitted probability current densities in each region. Be 
sure to indicate the direction and magnitude of each current density and label it as 
reflected, transmitted, etc. 

[c] List the conditions that you would use to relate the pieces of the function iPe{x) in each 
region to one another. Do you have enough conditions to uniquely determine all of the 
arbitrary constants in these solutions? If not, discuss the physical significance of the one 
(or ones) you cannot determine from these conditions. 

[d] Define the probability of transmission into the region x > Lf 2, explaining the physical 
significance of this quantity and relating it to the current densities of part [c]. 

[e] Show that the transmission coefficient is given by 


T(E) = 


1 + i 


Vg 


4 E(E -F Vq) 


sin 2 k-zL 


( 8 . 6 . 1 ) 


where is the wavenumber in the region -L/2 < x < L/2. (This need not entail 
much work if you think about how this potential is related to one whose transmission 


342 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 






coefficient you know.) Under what conditions on k 2 is T(E) = 1 ? Consider an energy 
E such that this condition is satisfied. At this energy, what is the value of the reflection 
coefficient R{E) for this system? Why? 

Compare the descriptions given by quantum and classical physics of the motion of a 
(microscopic) particle with this potential. 

8.7 The Mystery of the Potential Step 

Here’s a puzzler: Does our finding that R(E) = 1 for states of the potential step with E <V 0 
contradict our finding that the probability density in Region 2 for such a state is non-zero? 
Suppose we were to measure the position of the electron and found it, say, in an interval 
in Region 2 of magnitude 1/(2k 2 ). By such a measurement, we have localized the state of 
the particle, i.e., we have changed its position uncertainty. Discuss the consequences of this 
localization for the momentum uncertainty of the projectile and for its energy uncertainty. 
Now, is it possible to detect an electron in the CF region with T < 0? If not, why not? If 
so, what sense does this make? 

8.8 Applying the Correspondence Principle 

Applying the correspondence principle to scattering problems can be tricky if you use the 
limit h —> 0. But there is another way: taking the energy to extremes. Show that in the limits 
E » Vo and E <C Vo the transmission coefficient obeys the expected classical results, i.e., 

T(E) -* 1 

e»v 0 

T(E) -* 0. 

E<&V 0 

Problems 

8.1 A Review Problem on Stationary States of a Piecewise-Constant Potential 
Consider a particle of mass m with the potential energy 


00 

x < 0 


Vi 

0<x< L/2 . 

(8.1.1) 

v 2 

x > L/2 



Were we to set Vi = 0 and V 2 = oo, this potential would reduce to an infinite square well 
of width L/2. But we’ve done that problem to death, so let’s consider some other choices of 
these parameters. 


( 8 . 8 . 1 ) 

( 8 . 8 . 2 ) 


Part A: Bound States 

For this part, consider only energies in the range V\ < E < V 2 . Moreover, suppose that the 

depth of the well, V 2 — V\ , is great enough to support several bound states. 

[A.a] Suppose that V 2 = oo but V\ > 0. These choices give the potential shown in 
Fig. 8.1.1b. Detennine the stationary-state energies and eigenfunctions for this po¬ 
tential. 

[A.b] Suppose instead that V\ = 0 but V 2 is finite and positive, i.e., consider the potential of 
Fig. 8.1.1c. 

(1) What are the boundary conditions on the bound-state eigenfunctions of this po¬ 
tential? 

(2) Sketch the ground-state eigenfunction. 

(3) Compare the energy of the function in (2) to the energy of the corresponding 
eigenfunction of an infinite square well of width L/2: i.e., is the energy of your 
function less than, equal to, or greater than £?{ o0> ? Explain your answer. 

(4) The three lowest bound-state energies of a finite square well of width L and depth 
V 2 are E\ = 0.98 V 2} E 2 = 0.383 V 2 , and E 3 = 0.808 V 2 . Now, what is the 
ground-state energy of potential in Fig. 8.1.1c? Explain your answer. 


Exercises and Problems 343 






(a) 


(b) 


(c) 


Figure 8.1.1 


[A.c] Finally, consider the potential energy shown in Fig. 8.1.1a with Vi = 10.0eV and 
Vi = 1.0eV. Evaluate the energy of the ground state of this potential. 

Part B: Continuum States 

In this part, consider only energies E > Vi in Eq. (8.1.1) for Vi > Vi > 0. 

[B.a] Write down the general solution of the TISE in each region defined by this potential. 
Hint: To simplify the rest of this problem, write your solutions in trigonometric rather 
than complex exponential form. 

[B.bJ Apply the boundary conditions on the eigenfunction at x = 0. 

[B.c] Write down the continuity conditions that must hold at x = L/2. Apply these condi¬ 
tions to your general solution. (But don’t try to solve the resulting equations!) 

[B.d] Are the energies of the stationary states with E > Vi quantized? Why or why not? 
Are they degenerate? Why or why not? 

[B.e] Suppose V\ = 10.0 eV and Vi = 20.0 eV. Consider a continuum state of energy 
E = 30.0 eV. 

(1) Evaluate the de Broglie wavelength of the electron in each region. 

(2) Draw a sketch of the eigenfunction for this energy. 

Part C: A Little Something Extra 

[C] The infinity in the potential (8.1.1) at x = 0 has an interesting consequence for the 
problem of a particle beam incident on this potential from the right with energy E. 
Evaluate the probability that a particle in such a beam will be reflected back into 
Region 3. Give a derivation or (brief) justification of your answer. 

Hint: Are the spatial functions for this problem travelling waves or standing waves? 
8.2 How Many Bound States Are in Your Well? 

From the discussion in § 8.8 on solution of the transcendental equations for bound-state 
energies of the finite square well, you can see why it’s important to be able to determine in 
advance the number of bound states a particular potential supports. This problem explores 
some ways to do so. Unless otherwise stated, all questions pertain to a symmetric potential 
well of depth Vo and width L. 

[a] Have another look at the figures in § 8.8. Now, explain why the following rule holds: 


Rule 

All symmetric finite square wells, however weak they may be, support at least one bound 
state. 


344 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




Is this rule true for an asymmetric well, such as Eq. (8.100)? Why or why not? 

[b] Prove that the number Nb of bound states supported by V(x) is determined by the 
potential strength parameter £ as follows: 

(Nb - 1)^ < C < Nby^ => V(x) supports Nb bound states. (8.2.1) 

[c] Let denote the stationary-state energies of an infinite square well of width L. 

Show that the number of bound states Nb supported by the corresponding finite well is 
determined by where Vo falls on the energy spectrum of the infinite well, according to 
the rule 

, < V„ < E<£\ (8.2.2) 

with the convention that E^ = 0. 

[d] Determine the number of even- and odd-parity bound stationary states in a well of depth 
Vo = 1.0 eV and width L = 1.0 A. Also determine the number of states of each parity 
in a well of depth Vo = 100 eV and width L = 10 A. 

[e] Consider a quantum-well heterostructure (§ 8.9) that can be modeled by a symmetric 
finite square well of depth 0.361 eV and width 180 A. How many bound states (of an 
electron) does this heterostructure support? 

8.3 Applications of the Finite-Square Well I: Atomic Physics 

In the alkali atoms, the least tightly bound electron—the valence electron —experiences an 
attractive potential due to the nucleus and the other (so-called “core”) electrons. The core 
electrons effectively screen the valence electron in such a way that its potential can (crudely) 
be modeled by a symmetric finite square well. 

For example, the diameter of the potassium atom is roughly 4.324 A. So we might 
choose as the width L = 4.3 A. Consider an electron in a symmetric finite well of this width 
and of depth Vo = 30.0 eV. 

[a] How many bound stationary states does this potential energy support? What is the parity 
of each bound Hamiltonian eigenfunction? 

[b] Calculate the binding energy (accurate to three decimal places) of each bound state. 
Express your answer in eV. 

[c] Graph the spatial functions for each bound state. (You need not normalize your spatial 
functions. But in every other respect, your graphs should be quantitatively accurate.) 
Sketch a typical continuum-state function— i.e., iPe(x) for some energy E > Vo. 

[d] For the ground state of this square well, calculate the probability for detection of a 
particle outside the well. Discuss the physical significance of this number. 

[e] Suppose a beam of photons of wavelength A is incident on an electron in the ground state 
of this potential well. For what values of A could the incident photon be absorbed, induc¬ 
ing a transition of the electron into a higher-energy bound state or into the continuum? 
(Express your answer in angstroms.) 

Remark: In actual atoms and molecules, electrons are forbidden from making certain tran¬ 
sitions between stationary states by selection rules. These rules follow from the angular 
momentum properties of the bound stationary states of atoms. These properties are irrelevant 
to a one-dimensional system such as the present finite square well, but not to atoms (see 
Volume II). 

8.4 Applications of the Finite Square Well: II (Nuclear Physics) 

Guided by our understanding of classical E & M, we can write the potential energy of an 
atom or a molecule as the sum of Coulomb (electrostatic) interaction terms between pairs 
of charged particles. But in nuclear physics, there is no classical analogue from which to 
determine the potential energy of a nucleus. So nuclear physicists must resort to model 
potentials constructed from experimental data, such as the observed stationary bound-state 
energies of nucleons. Like much of our information about the physics of nuclei, these data 


Exercises and Problems 345 



are often determined in collision experiments. For example, we could model the potential of 
a nucleon in a nucleus by a symmetric finite square well. 

In particular, consider a neutron in the ground state of such a well. From experiments 
in the laboratory, we find the following infonnation: 

(1) Gamma rays scattered from this nucleus can cause ejection of the neutron provided their 
kinetic energy is at least 8 MeV. 

(2) The width of the well is L = 3 fermi. 

How deep would a square well of this width have to be to bind a neutron by at least 8 MeV? 
Explain how you arrived at your answer. 

8.5 Solution of the TISE by Numerical Integration 

For some systems, analytical solution of the TISE (using the procedure in § 8.4) is not 
the easiest way to obtain the bound-state eigenfunctions and energies. For (many) others, 
analytic solution is impossible. In this problem, we explore an alternate way to solve for the 
eigenfunctions in such problems: numerical integration. (This method has the advantage that 
it is also applicable to continuous potentials, such as those we’ll study in Chap. 9.) 

For example, suppose we have a particle of mass m with the potential energy shown in 

x < —L/2 
—L/2 < x < —L/A 

—L/A <x< LI A . (8.5.1) 

L/A < x < L/2 
x > L/2 


I'lg. O.J.l, 


V(x) = 


Let’s choose Vo = 7r 2 ^ 2 /8 ml? and concentrate on the ground state. Our goals are the energy 
and eigenfunction of this state, Ei and ij>i{x). 



2 4 4 2 Figure 8.5.1 

[a] In Chap. 7 we studied the ground state of the infinite square well. We can reduce the 
potential in Fig. 8.5.1 to such a potential by setting Vo = 0. Using your understanding of 
the infinite well, draw a qualitatively accurate sketch of if)\ (x) for the potential shown 
above. Be sure to show all important changes in wavelength, etc. On the same graph, 
sketch the ground-state eigenfunction for the infinite well. 

[b] Use numerical integration of the TISE to determine the value of E\. On the same 
figure, graph your normalized spatial function ^i(x) and the solution of the TISE for 
an energy near but not equal to E\. 

Hint: To start, you’ll need a reasonable initial guess at E\, which you can obtain by 
thinking about the ground-state energy for the infinite well. A reasonable step-size (Ax) 
is L/20. You must also decide where to start the integration. You know the symmetry of 
the ground-state eigenfunction and can deduce from this information the value of the first 
derivative (the slope) of 'ipi(x) at x = 0. So this point is a good place to initialize your 
integration. Then integrate to x = L/2, adjusting E\ until Tp\(x) obeys the appropriate 


346 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



boundary condition at x — L/2 (to, say, two decimal places). You need not normalize 
ipi(x)\ thus you are free to pick the value of this function at the initial point equal to 
any convenient (real) number. 

[c] Alas, sometimes numerical integration is impractical or, even worse, unstable. In such 
predicaments, analytic solution of the differential equation may be feasible (as in the finite 
square well of § 8 . 8 ). Solve the TISE for the potential 8.5.1. for the ground-state energy 
in V(a;) by analytic methods. That is, use the boundary and continuity conditions on 
^e(e) to derive a transcendental equation for the energies, and then solve your equation 
for Ei in terms of Vo by graphical or iterative method. 

Hint: You can make your life a little easier by using real functions wherever possible. 

8.6 The Dreaded Asymmetric Square Well 

[a] Using the procedure of § 8.4, evaluate the energies of the bound stationary states of the 
asymmetric square well (8.100) for Vi = 50 eV and Vs = 30 eV. Let the width of the 
well be 1 A. (You will obtain a single transcendental equation for the binding energies 
in this well, which you can solve graphically or using the methods in § 8 . 8 .) 

[b] Does an asymmetric well such as the one in part [a] necessarily support one or more 
bound states, like the symmetric finite well? Prove your answer. 

8.7 Quantum Reflection of Your Car (The Correspondence Principle) 

A particle incident on a symmetric finite square well (not a barrier) of depth Vo with energy 
greater than Vo may be reflected from the left wall of the well. Let’s see what happens in 
a macroscopic situation. Suppose a fast-moving automobile is hurtling towards a river bank. 
Estimate the probability that the driver will avoid drowning because his car is repelled by 
quantum mechanical reflection at the river bank. (There are some circumstances where you 
just can’t count on quantum mechanics.) 

8.8 Transmission in the Limit of a Very Large Barrier 

Some barriers are very wide. This circumstance is a boon, for it allows us to derive a simple, 
physically reasonable approximation for the transmission coefficient T(E), which otherwise 
is given by the less-than-simple result we derived in § 8 . 6 , Eq. (8.81). (Even if your barrier 
isn’t wide, you may want to examine its transmission and reflection coefficients in this limit. 
Such a study is an excellent check on your algebra.) 

For an energy E < Vo, consider the limiting case in which the barrier width L is so large 
that kL » 1, where k is the decay constant in the CF region. Since 1/k is the characteristic 
length of penetration into the CF region, this condition amounts to the reasonable requirement 
that L » 1/k. 

[a] Show that in this limit the transmission coefficient is given by 

(8 - 8,) 

[b] What happens to T(E ) in the extreme limit kL —» 00 ? Why is this limit called the 
classical limit ? 

Hint: This problem is a case in point of my remark in § 8.6 that manipulating complex 
algebraic expressions is easier if you don’t work with the final result—here Eqs. (8.81) 
for T(E) —but rather with a well-chosen intermediate result. In this problem, you should 
manipulate the expression (8.73) for the ratio A ( 3 ) /A (1) . 

Remark: Transmission in the limit of a huge barrier is sometimes described in temis of a 
quantity called the opacity. The opacity, which is usually denoted a, is defined (for a barrier 
of width L and height Vo) as a = 2mVoL 2 (h 2 . 

8.9 Applications of Barrier Penetration 

Let’s consider some practical applications of the results we obtained in § 8.6 and in Pblm. 8.7. 
Suppose a beam of electrons of kinetic energy 3.8 eV is incident from the left on a square 
potential barrier of height 14.5 eV and width 5.3 A. 


Exercises and Problems 347 



[a] Evaluate the probability that a particle in the beam will be transmitted through the barrier 
using the exact equations in § 8.7, and with the approximate result you derived in the 
previous problem. 

[b] Suppose kL » 1. Use the result of the previous problem to show that for many values 
of E/Vo, the order of magnitude of the transmission coefficient is given to a good 
approximation by 

T(E) «e _2 * L . (8.9.1) 

What does this expression give for the order of magnitude of T(E) for the physical 
conditions described above? 

Now let’s change the experiment a little. Consider two experiments, one involving a beam 
of protons, the other a beam of deuterons. In each experiment, the source produces a beam 
of incident energy 7MeV that impinges on a barrier of height lOMeV and width 10“ 14 m. 

[c] Which beam, if either, will have a greater transmission probability? Explain your answer. 

[d] Verify (or contradict) your answer to [c] by evaluating T(E) for each beam. 

8.10 Continuum States of a Two-Step Potential 

A beam of electrons with energy E is incident from the left on the “two-step potential” 

{ 0 x < 0 

V v 0 < x < L . (8.10.1) 

V 2 x>L 


We’ll suppose that V 2 > V\ and will consider only continuum states with E > V 2 . 

[a] Derive the following expression for the probability of transmission into the region x > L : 


T(E) = 


4A?i &2 

kl (fci + k 3 ) 2 - (jfc? - k\) (kl - kl) sin 2 k 2 L' 


( 8 . 10 . 2 ) 


Graph T(E) versus E for a range of energies E > V 2 . 

[b] Although I’ve given you the answer to [a], don’t just believe it. Show that (8.10.2) 
reduces to the correct transmission coefficients for the special cases V\ — V 2 and V 2 — 0. 

[c] Let’s consider this problem from a slightly different point of view. Suppose E is fixed 
but we can vary the width of the first step, L. Determine an expression for the value of 
L that will maximize the transmission coefficient T(E), writing your answer in terms of 
the de Broglie wavelength in the region 0 < x < L. 

[d] In part [b] we saw that the transmission coefficient for the double step reduces to that 
of the single step if V\ = V 2 . But how is it related to the coefficients for the two-step 
potentials that make up the double-step in Fig. 8.10.1? Let T\(E) denote the transmission 
coefficient for a single step at x = 0 and T 2 (E) the coefficient for a single step at x = L. 
Write down expressions for T\{E) and for T 2 {E) and show that each is greater than or 
equal to T(E) of part [a]. 

[e] Use your answer to [d] to demonstrate that T(E) £ T\{E)T 2 {E). But wait! Is this 
correct? Consider the following argument: 


“The probability current density transmitted past the step at a; = 0 is T\{E)j mc . 
This current is incident on the step at x = L. Therefore the current density 
transmitted into the region x > L is T 2 {E)T\{E)j lxw , and we conclude that 
T(E) = T 2 (E)T 1 (E)r 

Somewhere in this argument there lurks an incorrect assumption. What is it? 


348 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 




0 L x Figure 8.10.1 Two-step potential. 

8.11 Square Wells: Going to Extremes 

Having gone through the not-inconsiderable algebra required to determine the transcendental 
equations (8.97) for the bound-state energies and Eqs. (8.99) for the Hamiltonian eigenfunc¬ 
tions of the finite square well, how can we convince ourselves that our answers are correct? 
Well, one way to do so is to consider a limiting case for which we know the correct an¬ 
swer. For the finite square well, the obvious limit is that in which the well becomes infinite, 
Vo —* oo. 

Show that in this limit, the finite square well energies and spatial functions reduce to 
Eqs. (7.49) and (7.55) for the infinite square well. (In considering the spatial funct : ons, you 
need show only that their dependence on x reverts to that of the infinite square well spatial 
functions: don’t worry about the normalization factor.) 

8.12 A Nifty Problem-Solving Trick 

You can solve lots of problems in quantum mechanics (and, for that matter, in most other 
fields of science and engineering) by analogy to problems that you have already worked. The 
key to mastering this powerful tactic is to think carefully about how the problem you are trying 
to solve differs physically from problems whose solutions you know. 

For example, in some applications to solid state physics, the potential energy of an 
electron can be modeled rather accurately by the “semi-infinite” potential in Fig. 8.12.1, 



( oo 

X < 0 


V(x) 


0 < x < L . 

(8.12.1) 


l Vi 

x > L 



Figure 8.12.1 A "semi-infinite” square 
well. 

[a] Suppose the well parameters Vo and L are such that this potential energy supports three 
bound stationary states. Sketch the spatial functions of these states. 

Hint: What are the boundary conditions on iPe{x) at x = 0 and in the limit x —> oo? 

[b] What is the (transcendental) equation for the bound-state energies of the semi-infinite 
well? Answer this question in two ways: 

1) by solving the TISE, imposing appropriate boundary and continuity conditions; 

2 ) by writing down the answer from a consideration of the corresponding finite square 
well. 

Which way was easier? 

8.13 The R-matrix Method 

In research, it’s often very difficult to solve for the Hamiltonian eigenfunction of an atomic, 
molecular, or nuclear system, because we do not know the potential ( e.g ., in nuclear physics) 



Exercises and Problems 349 



or because the TISE poses insuperable computational problems ( e.g., in atomic and molecular 
physics). One widely-used stratagem for conquering such problems is the R-matrix method. 
This method exploits the remarkable fact that you don’t need to know the detailed structure 
of the eigenfunction in the region of the potential provided you can somehow evaluate this 
function (and its first derivative) at the “potential boundary”—the point in space beyond which 
the potential is (effectively) zero. To illustrate the R-matrix method, consider a very simple 
application: a symmetric, piecewise-constant one-dimensional potential. 

[a] A beam of particles of energy E and unit amplitude is incident from the left on a 
symmetric potential V^a:). The potential is known to be zero except in the region 
-L/2 < x < L/2, but it is not necessarily piecewise-constant. All we know about it 
inside this region is that it is well-behaved (e.g., continuous). Show that the probability 
amplitudes for reflection and transmission, p(E) and t(E), can be written in terms of 
the logarithmic derivative at x = +L/ 2, 

£ B (i) . §/*>.(.)] = f £[ln^(x)] = §^£W*). MM) 

[Notice that I have redefined this quantity (see § 8.7) by multiplying by L/2, so as to 
produce a conveniently dimensionless quantity.] 

[b] Derive expressions for the reflection and transmission coefficients R(E) and T(E) in 
terms of £e(-|). 

[c] Now let’s apply the result of part [a] to the barrier potential in Fig. 8.17, 

{ 0 * < -L/2 

Vo —L/2 < x < L/2 . (8.13.2) 

0 x> L/2 

Show that for states with E > Vo, your results of part [a] reduce to Eqs. (8.81) for T(E) 
and to the corresponding result for R(E). 

Hint: Since V(:c) is symmetric, there exist two (degenerate) eigenfunctions for each 
energy; these can be chosen so that each has definite parity. You can reduce the amount 
of algebra in this problem by defining a logarithmic derivative for each of these functions, 
say for the even function and for the odd function. You can then derive 

rather simple expressions for p(E) and t(E) in terms of these logarithmic derivatives. 
Remark: In one dimension, the “R-matrix” that gives this method its name is the inverse 
of the logarithmic derivative. In applications of this method, it turns out that it is more 
convenient (computationally) to use this quantity rather than C[iJ>e{x)}- 
8.14 Resonances in One-Dimensional Potential Wells 

One of the most tantalizing phenomena in physics is the resonance. Resonances are a phe¬ 
nomenon of scattering, and we can illustrate their basic physics in the context of a (slightly 
artificial) one-dimensional potential. (Actually, the creature we are studying is called a virtual 
state, because it occurs in a state with zero angular momentum; but such technicalities need 
not concern us. See, however, the following problem.) 

Consider a particle of mass m with a “soft” square well potential, i.e., a semi-infinite 
square well with a delta-function potential for positive a;: 


V(x) 


oo 

a6(x — L) 


x < 0 
x > 0 


(8.14.1) 


The constant a is called the opacity of the (repulsive) delta function potential, which is 
centered at x = L. We shall assume that a » 1, i.e., the barrier is highly opaque. 

[a] Consider a continuum state of energy E = h 2 k 2 /2m > 0. Show that in the region out¬ 
side the well the Hamiltonian eigenfunction for this state (normalized according to Dirac 


350 


Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



Delta function normalization, as in Chap. 4) can be written in terms of the wavenumber 
k and a function of k that we’ll denote /3(k ) as 

iPe{x) = sin (kx + /?(/c)). (x > L) (8.14.2) 

As you may have guessed, (3(k ) is the phase of the eigenfunction outside the “soft box.” 
What is the form of iJ)e{x) inside the well (0 < x < L)? 

[b] Derive expressions for the phase 0(k) and the amplitude A(k) of the eigenfunction 
inside the well. 

Hint: Your expressions for 0(k) and A(k) should be written in terms of k , L, and a. 
You will find the subsequent parts of this problem to be easier if you first transform your 
results from part [b] into expressions for tanP(k) and for A(k) in terms of cos 2 kL and 
sin 2 kL. 

[c] Derive expressions for 0(k) and A(k) in the limit of an infinitely opaque barrier (a —> 
oo) and thereby show that except for certain special values of k there is no penetration into 
the well ( i.e ., the Hamiltonian eigenfunction inside the well is zero). In this limit , what are 
the energies corresponding to the special values of k for which penetration does occur? 
These special energies are the resonance energies, and the penetration phenomenon you 
have exhibited here is characteristic of scattering at a resonance energy. 

[d] Analysis of the amplitude (which you need not carry out) reveals that for a finite but 
very large opacity (a » 1 ), the amplitude A(k) attains its maximum for values of k that 
satisfy the transcendental equation 


tan 2 kL = 


2k 

2ma/h 2 


(8.14.3) 


Like the transcendental equations we solved in § 8.8, this equation is satisfied only 

for a discrete set of wavenumbers. We’ll label these roots k n \n = 1,2,_ Derive 

expressions for the amplitude of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction inside the well at one of 
these “resonant wavenumbers” [A(/c„)] and show that for even n, these amplitudes are 
huge [A(k„) » 1], while for odd n they are very small [A(A;n) <C 1]. For a » 1, 
where are the resonance energies in proximity to those of part (c)? 

[e] To get a feeling for the extraordinary effect of a resonance on the eigenfunction (and 
hence on the position probability density), consider a specific case: 


_ h 2 IOOtt 
2m L 


(8.14.4) 


Graph A(k) and 0(k) for values of k in the range < k < %/£■. You will find that 
there is one resonance in this range; discuss the effect of this resonance on A(A;) and 
on /3(k) for k in this range. What happens to the resonance energy and wavenumber as 
a —► oo? 

8.15 More About Virtual States (in One Dimension) 

In this problem, we’ll look at virtual states from a different point of view than that adopted 
in Pblm. 8.13. Note: This problem does not require that you have completed Pblm. 8.13. 
Consider the potential energy 


V(x) = 


0 x < —L/2 - b 
Vo -L/2 -b<x< -L/2 
0 -L/2 <x<L/2 

Vo L/2 < x < L/2 + b 
0 x> L/2 + b 


(8.15.1) 


Exercises and Problems 351 



_« q , b x Figure 8.15.1 A piecewise-constant 

2 L 1 L potential that supports a virtual state. 

This potential consists of two barriers, each of height Vo and equal width b, separated by 
a distance L (see Fig. 8.15.1). It is a repulsive potential that does not support any bound 
stationary states. 

[a] Discuss qualitatively and quantitatively the stationary states of a particle with this poten¬ 
tial energy. Consider two cases: E >Vq and E < Vo. Show that in the energy range 
0 < E < Vo there exist discrete values of the energy E n such that an eigenfunction with 
energy near E n has a much larger amplitude in the region between the barriers (i.e., for 
—L/2 < x < L/2) than anywhere else in space. 

At any time to, we can construct a wave packet that is highly localized in the region between 
the barriers by superposing a number of (continuum) stationary-state wave functions ^e(s, fo) 
with energies in a narrow range A E n about one of these “special energies” E n . As time passes 
(i.e., for t > to), the packet “leaks out” of the region between the wells. A quantum state 
represented by such a function is called a virtual state of energy E u and energy uncertainty 
A E„. 

[b] Let A t,t denote the time it takes the packet to “leak out” of the region between the 
barriers. Show that for a virtual state of energy E n , the product A E n At n is a number 
of the order of Planck’s constant. 

[c] Consider the limit in which the width of the barriers becomes infinite: b —> oo with the 
condition that the width L of the well between the barriers is constant. Show that in this 
limit, the energies E n of the virtual states of part [a] approach the bound-state energies 
of a finite square well of width L and depth Vo. Isn’t that amazing? 


352 Chap. 8 States of a Particle in One Dimension I 



States of a Particle in One 

Dimension SB 

Mainly Continuous Potentials 


9.1 Regions, Regions Everywhere 

9.2 Curvature is the Key 

9.3 The Stationary States of an Arbitrary Potential 

9.4 Mathematical Properties of Bound-State Eigenfunctions 

9.5 The Harmonic Oscillator Made Simple 

9.6 An Application: The Vibrations of a Diatomic Molecule 

9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 

9.8 The SHO—The Answers 

9.9 The SHO—The Physics 

9.10 The Incredible Sloshing Oscillator 

9.11 Final Thoughts—and an Application of the Linear Potential 



‘My son, seek not 

things that are too hard for thee; 

and search not out 

things that are above thy strength.’ 

—Jesus-ben-Sira 

in Between Sunset and Moonrise 
by R. H. Malden 


In Chap. 8 we learned how to solve the TISE for bound and continuum stationary-state 
eigenfunctions of one-dimensional potentials that could be approximated by piecewise- 
constant functions. But most potentials are not amenable to so simple a model, for their 
variation with x is more complicated than a finite number of abrupt changes. Here, for 
example, are several such potentials, each of which plays an important role in a discipline 


of current research: 1 



V(x) = 

harmonic oscillator 

(9.1a) 

V (a;) = ax 

linear potential 

(9Ab) 

V(x) = D [l - e“ a(x_a:e) ] 

2 

Morse potential 

(9.1c) 

V(x) = — 

cos^ ax 

Poschl-Teller potential hole 

(9 Ad) 


[In Eqs. (9.1), everything that isn’t a; or a number is a parameter.] We cannot obtain 
eigenfunctions of Hamiltonians with these potentials using the machinery of Chap. 8, 
because their continuous nature prohibits us from subdividing space (—oo < x < oo) into 
a (finite) number of regions within which V(x) is constant. Of course, the mathematical 
and physical principles of Chap. 8—boundary, asymptotic, and continuity conditions— 
do apply to these systems. But we need new mathematical tools for solving the TISE. 

Most continuous potentials support both bound and unbound states. The eigen¬ 
functions for unbound states —the continuum stationary-state functions—are not nor¬ 
malizable. But we can interpret them physically (as scattering probability amplitudes) 
because they remain finite in the asymptotic region; i.e., for any E in the continuum, 
these eigenfunctions obey [c./., Eq. (8.8)] 


\^e(x)\ < oo Continuum state 


(9.2a) 


The eigenfunctions for bound states are normalizable—and hence physically admissible— 
only for certain discrete energies. All such functions must satisfy the boundary conditions 
[c./., Eq. (8.7)] 


^ e { x ) -* 0 Bound state 

x —►ioo 


(9.2 b) 


In either case, of course, the full wave function is 




(9.3) 


1 For each of these potentials, analytic solutions of the TISE exist. In this chapter you’ll see how to 
solve the TISE for the harmonic oscillator (§ 9.7) and the linear potential (§ 9.11). For a discussion of the 
Poschl-Teller potential hole, see G. Poschl and E. Teller, Z. Physik, 83, 143 (1933). 


354 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





Strategies for obtaining continuum eigenfunctions of continuous potentials differ 
only in detail from those for the piecewise-constant potentials of Chap. 8. So in this 
chapter, I won’t dwell on continuum states; rather, I’ll show you how to obtain bound- 
state solutions of the TISE for a continuous potential. Many and varied are the methods 
for doing so, and an in-depth look at several of them would take us far from the essentials 
of quantum physics. So I’ll concentrate on a single, very powerful, widely applicable 
technique: the method of power-series expansion (§ 9.7). 

But one does not always need a quantitative solution of the TISE. If all we need is 
a rough idea of the nature of the eigenfunctions and the energies, we can use qualitative 
arguments such as those in Chap. 8. So we’ll begin (in § 9.2) by generalizing these 
arguments from Chap. 8 and by learning a few new tricks. In subsequent sections we’ll 
augment our qualitative understanding with quantitative results for selected systems. 

So much effort goes into solving the TISE for these systems that it’s easy to 
forget that stationary states are only a small, special subset of the quantum states of the 
system. So, for the principal example of this chapter (the simple harmonic oscillator), 
I’ll supplement our study of stationary states in § 9.6-9.9 with a look at a non-stationary 
state (§ 9.10). 

But first we must return to our scheme for analyzing stationary states according 
to regions defined by the potential and see what, if anything, of this procedure can be 
salvaged when the potential is continuous. 


9.1 REGIONS , REGIONS EVERYWHERE 

Identifying regions of piecewise-constant potential (Chap. 8) was trivial: we defined 
each region by the appropriate constant value of the potential, V q , irrespective of the 
state we were considering. For a state of energy E, we then classified each region 
as classically-allowed (CA) or classically-forbidden (CF), accordingly as E < V q or 
E > V q . 

The difficulty posed by continuous potentials, such as those in Fig. 9.1, is that 
a continuous potential does not uniquely demarcate regions of space. Consider, for 
example, the three states indicated by horizontal lines in Fig. 9.1a. Two of these are 
continuum states; the other is a bound state. For the continuum state with the highest 
energy, all of space is classically allowed, because E >V(x) for all x. But for the other 
continuum state, the region under the barrier is classically forbidden. And for the bound 
state, only the region in the well is classically allowed. Clearly, to define the regions 
of a continuous potential we must take into account the energy of the state we want to 
investigate. Yet, the classification scheme of Chap. 8 still applies: 


E > V'(.t) 

classically allowed 

E < V{x) 

classically forbidden 


Since the regions of a continuous potential depend on the energy of the state, so 
do the locations of the boundaries between regions. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 9.1b, 
the boundaries for two bound states of an attractive well occur at different values of x. 
Borrowing from classical physics, quantum mechanics call each boundary between a CA 
and a CF region a classical turning point. The classical turning points are the values 
of x at which the total energy of a particle equals its potential energy. (A macroscopic 


Sec. 9.1 Regions, Regions Everywhere 355 




V(x) 


Continuum state 



(a) 



Figure 9.1 Two continuous potentials. 

(a) A finite-range potential with both 
a barrier and a well. Such a potential 
supports bound and continuum states, with 
different regions, (b) The regions and 
classical turning points of a continuous 
potential well depend on the energy E of its 
states, as indicated by the horizontal lines. 


particle moving through a classically-allowed region will turn around when it reaches a 
position where its potential energy equals its total energy, because the kinetic energy of 
such a particle can’t be negative.) To emphasize the dependence of these points on the 
energy, I’ll denote the classical turning point between region q and region q + 1 by the 
slightly ornate symbol x^ ( E ). So, by definition, 

V (a^ 9 * ( E ) ) = E [at a classical turning point]. (9.4) 

Having identified and classified the regions of V(.t) for a state, we can sketch the 
Hamiltonian eigenfunction. We prepare such drawings just as in Chap. 8: we consider 
each region separately, then join the pieces of the eigenfunction at the classical turning 
points in such a way that the eigenfunction and its first derivative are continuous every¬ 
where. But when we try to implement this approach quantitatively , to solve the TISE as 
we did for a piecewise-constant potential in § 8.4, we run into big trouble. 

What the Hamiltonian Eigenfunction in a Region Is Not 

The potential in the TISE is the troublemaker. In the q th region, this equation is 

^\x) = -'^[E-V(x)\i>^ ) (x). x^(E)<x<x^(E). (9.5) 

dx lx 

Look carefully at the right-hand side. It does not have the simple form of a constant 
times the unknown function [c./., Eq. (8.22) and Eq. (8.29)]. So we cannot simply write 
down an analytic form for the solution in each region. 


356 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



Equation (9.5) is an ordinary differential equation of the form 

= (function of x)iJ>e(x). (9.6) 

So its solution, iPe\x), is not a simple sum of sine and cosine functions in a CA region 
or of real exponentials in a CF region. Consequently, trying to work out this solution 
via a region-by-region analysis probably won’t work. Instead, we must tackle the full 
TISE, 


= -jjr[ E - v(x)]i> E (x) 


— OO < X < oo. 


To reinforce this point, ponder for a moment the ground-state eigenfunction of a 
simple harmonic oscillator [the potential (9.1a)] shown in Figure 9.2. As we’ll discover 
in § 9.7, this eigenfunction, which for technical reasons is labelled with the index n = 0, 


ip 0 {x) = 


0 —m {jJqx 2 / 2h 


The dependence on x of this function differs strikingly from that of an eigenfunction 
for a piecewise-constant potential: nowhere does ipo(x) have the simple trigonometric 
or exponential dependence of the eigenfunctions of Chap. 8. So don’t forget that 


Rule 

The Hamiltonian eigenfunctions for a continuous potential are not made up of pieces each 
of which can be written as a sum of simple trigonometric or exponential functions. Instead, 
the functions must be obtained by solving the full TISE, Eq. (9.7). 

Before tackling the quantitative solution of this equation, I want to show you how to 
deduce the qualitative nature of ip^ix). Get ready to cast your mind back to high school 
algebra, for it is there that we shall find the key. 



Figure 9.2 The ground-state eigenfunction 
of the harmonic oscillator (9.1a). The 
classical turning points are labelled 
a’(‘> (E„) and a< 2 > (£ 0 ). 


Sec. 9.1 Regions, Regions Everywhere 357 





9.2 CURVATURE IS THE KEY 


You probably learned about the curvature of simple functions in your high school mathe¬ 
matics course. But you don’t have to dig through a math book to see curvature. Curvature 
is the difference between a gently rolling hill and a precipitous mountain, between a nar¬ 
row ravine and a wide valley. In math or in nature, the curvature of a function is a 
measure of the rate of change of the function’s slope. The first derivative of a function 
is its slope, so the second derivative is its curvature. This quantity tells us “how rapidly 
the function turns over.” (When I talk about “rapid” or “slow” variation of a function, 
I don’t mean to imply variation in time. This colloquial usage refers to the variation of 
the function with x.) 

A glance at the Schrodinger equation (9.7) will reveal why curvature is so im¬ 
portant in the quantum mechanics of stationary states: the curvature of the Hamiltonian 
eigenfunction is dfy E (x)/dx 2 . In this section, we’ll discover what curvature can tell us 
about the nature of these eigenfunctions and their energies. 

In Chap. 8, we learned how to stitch together spatial functions for systems with 
piecewise-constant potentials from oscillatory and exponential pieces. The nature of 
each piece—oscillatory or exponential—depended on whether its region was classically 
allowed or classically forbidden. More generally, what determines the nature of any 
function f(x) is the sign of the curvature of the function. Examples of two types of 
functions are shown in Fig. 9.3. The function f(x) in Fig. 9.3 is oscillatory; such a 
function is often said to be concave. The second derivative d 2 f(x)/dx 2 is negative 
where f(x) is positive, and d 2 f(x)/dx 2 is positive where the function is negative. So 
the identifying feature of an oscillatory (concave) function is 


1 d 2 f 
f(x) dx 2 


<0 


f(x) is oscillatory (concave). (9.9a) 


By contrast, the function g(x) in Fig. 9.3 varies monotonically with x\ functions with 
this behavior are said to be convex. The sign of the second derivative of this function 
is identical to the sign of the function itself, so the identifying feature of a monotonic 
(convex) function is 


1 d 2 f 
f(x) dx 2 


>0 


f(x) is monotonic (convex) (9.9 b) 


The simplest oscillatory and monotonic functions are, respectively, the trigono¬ 
metric and (real) exponential functions of Table 8.3 ( cf , Tables 8.11 and 8.12). But 
these functions do not solve the TISE for a continuous potential, so only their qualitative 
nature is relevant here. 


Curvature and the Hamiltonian Eigenfunction 

The simplest deduction we can make from the curvature of an eigenfunction is whether 
it is oscillatory or monotonic. The form of the TISE (9.7) illuminates this feature of the 
eigenfunctions: 

r /2 2,771 

= ~-^[E- V(x)\ip E (x) [CA Region] (9.10a) 

= +^T i V ( x ) “ E]1>e(x) [CF Region] (9.106) 

358 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




9(x) 


— ff(x) = + n 2 (x)g{x) 
dx 2 


Concave 


Convex 



Figure 9.3 Examples of a concave and a convex function. 


Clearly, the TISE determines the nature of the eigenfunction in each region defined by 
V (a:) and E. The curvature of an eigenfunction at a point x depends on the energy E , 
on the value of x , and, of course, on the functional dependence of iPe{x) on x 2 

In particular, the sign of the curvature of ^eM— and hence the nature of this 
eigenfunction—is determined by the sign of E - V(x). In a CA region, the energy is 
greater than V(:c); so Eq. (9.9 a) applies and the eigenfunction is oscillatory. The reverse 
argument pertains to a CF region, and we conclude 3 


E > V(x) 

(CA region) 


if>E{x) is oscillatory 

E < V{x) 

(CF region) 

=»• 

is monotonic 


But the nature of an eigenfunction is only a small part of what we can learn from its 
curvature. We can use the relationship between curvature and the energy to draw accurate 
sketches of eigenfunctions even for very complicated potentials. To introduce this topic, I 
want to compare qualitatively two eigenfunctions of the (not-very-complicated) potential 
in Fig. 9.4a. Superimposed on this potential are the energies of its first and second excited 
states. The corresponding eigenfunctions, ip 2 (x) and ip 3 (x ), are shown in Figs. 9.4b 
and 9.4c. 

Question 9-1 

Explain why neither of the functions in Fig. 9.4 is the ground-state eigenfunction of the 

potential in Fig. 9.4a. Sketch the missing function. 

Let’s first deduce the shape of these eigenfunctions in the CA region. Since 
E 3 -V(x) > E 2 - V(x), the curvature of ip 3 (x) is greater than that of ip 2 {%)■ Hence 
the de Broglie wavelength of i/j 3 (x) is smaller than that of ip 2 (x) (/.*?., A 3 < A 2 ). (Notice 

2 Equations (9.10) show that the curvature of 4>e(x) depends on x. For this reason, rf 2 0 E /rf.r 2 should 
(strictly speaking) be called the “local curvature” of the eigenfunction. 

3 These arguments are consistent with our findings for a piecewise-constant potential. In this simple 
case E-V(x) = E-V q . The pieces of ^e(x) in a CA region are the simplest oscillatory functions, sin k q x 
and cos Ayr. Those in a CF region are the simple monotonic exponentials e ±K i x . 


Sec. 9.2 Curvature Is the Key 359 





(a) 




Figure 9.4 (a) A potential well and the eigenfunctions for (b) its first and (c) second 
excited states. The vertical dashed lines on the eigenfunction sketches are the classical 
turning points. [Adapted from Introduction to Quantum Physics by R. H. Dicke and 
J. P. Wittke (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, I960).] 


that the former eigenfunction has one more node than the latter.) Of course, we expect 
the de Broglie wavelengths to be related in this way, because E 3 > E 2 , and E oc 1/A 2 . 

Now let’s turn to the CF regions (outside the well). Here V{x) - E 3 < V(x)-E 2 , 
so the curvature of ^ 3 ( x ) is less than that of ip 2 (x). In these regions, both of these 
functions decay monotonically to zero, but the differences in their curvatures means that 
ipz{x) decays to zero more slowly (with increasing distance from the midpoint of the 
well) than does ip 2 (x). That is, ipz(x) penetrates deeper into the CF regions than does 
ip 2 (x). (If we pick E = 0 at the bottom of the well, as in Fig. 9.4a, we can translate 
this argument into a simple principle: the function with the larger energy is the most 
penetrating.) Mathematically, this difference appears in the decay constants for these 
functions, k 2 > /c 3 , and in the characteristic lengths, l//c 3 > \jn 2 . 

Aside: Another Look at the Finite Square Well. These arguments explain differ¬ 
ences between the various bound-state eigenfunctions of the symmetric square well 
of § 8.8 (c/., Fig. 8.23). Compare, for example, ip\{x) and ip 2 {x). The curvature 
of the latter function is roughly four times that of the former (because E 2 is roughly 
four times E\). Correspondingly, the de Broglie wavelength of tp 2 (x) is about half 
that of ip\(x). 

These arguments are also reflected in the data in Tables 8.7 and 8.8. Consider, 
for example, the CF regions of the finite square well. As the quantum number n 
(and hence the energy E n ) increases, the decay constant k„ decreases, and ip n (x) 
penetrates more deeply into the CF region. 


360 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 


The continuous potential in Fig. 9.4 looks rather like a “smoothed out” square 
well. And, indeed, the primary difference between the behavior of the eigenfunc¬ 
tions of this potential and those of the finite square well is that the pieces of the 
spatial functions for the continuous well are not simple trigonometric or exponential 
functions. Rather, they are complicated oscillatory or monotonic functions. 

To summarize this discussion of contrasting eigenfunctions, I’ll re-state our conclu¬ 
sions in terms of the binding energy e u (§ 8.8). The binding energy of a particle in a well 
is just the energy measured from the top of the well ; e.g., for the potential in Fig. 9.4a, 
€„ = Vo - E n . So, for example, the less tightly bound of two bound states is the one 
with the smaller binding energy. We have argued that 

Rule 

A weakly bound state oscillates more rapidly in a CA region and penetrates more deeply 
into a CF region than a tightly bound state. 

The “Local Wavelength” and Other Quantities 

You may have noticed that in discussing the eigenfunctions in Fig. 9.4, I used the 
“wavelengths” and “decay constants” of these functions. Because the potential is a 
continuous function of x, these quantities are not constants. Still, this usage enables us 
to exploit analogies between the Schrodinger Equations for continuous and piecewise- 
constant potentials. To acknowledge the x dependence of these quantities, we refer to 
them as “local” : 


III 

sh!?] 

1 

local wave number 

(9.1 la) 

«(*) s \Jj^[ V ( x )~ E ] 

local decay constant 

(9.1 lb) 

w V 2 tt 

= *<*)• 

local wavelength 

(9.11c) 

You may find it useful to write the TISE in CA and CF regions in terms 

of these 

quantities, viz., 



d 2 

= ~k 2 (x)ip E (x 

) CA Region 

(9.12a) 

d 2 

J ~2 ^e{x) = +k?{x)'iJje{x] 

) CF Region. 

(9.12b) 

[Compare these equations to Eqs. (8.24) and (8.31).] In terms of the local wavelengths 

and decay constants for two eigenfunctions, (x 

) and ip n (x ), with E m > E n , 

we have: 

. \ km{ x ) > k n ( 

x ) _ 


CA region < 

\A m (a)<A„( 

s E,n > E n 

x) 



1 1 E m > E n . 


Sec. 9.2 Curvature Is the Key 361 




Curvature, Energy, and Boundary Conditions 

The discussion of Fig. 9.4 exemplifies the intimate relationship between the energy of a 
bound state and the curvature of its spatial function. In Chaps. 7 and 8, we uncovered an¬ 
other intimate relationship, that between the allowed (quantized) values of these energies 
and the boundary conditions the corresponding eigenfunctions must satisfy. Indeed, in the 
solutions of the TISE for the infinite and finite square wells, quantization of the bound- 
state energies emerged as an inevitable consequence of these boundary conditions. We 
can use the connection between quantized energies, the curvature of eigenfunctions, and 
the boundary conditions on these functions to understand more deeply the phenomenon 
of quantization in quantum physics. 

Recall the infinite square well (§ 7.4). This potential defines only one region where 
iPe(x) is non-zero: within the walls. The spatial functions must equal zero at the walls, 
and this boundary condition restricts the allowed energies to E n = n 2 n 2 h 2 / (2 rriL 2 ) for 
n = 1, 2, 3,... . This restriction, in turn, constrains the wavelengths of the Hamiltonian 
eigenfunctions in this (CA) region to the discrete values A = 2 L, L , 2L/3, L/2, .... 
And this constraint controls the allowed curvatures of the eigenfunction. A solution of 
the TISE whose curvature differs even slightly from one of the allowed values will not 
satisfy the boundary condition at the walls of the box and hence is inadmissible. The 
principles at work in this trifling example are our guides to understanding the interplay 
of curvature and quantization in far more complicated systems. 

Now consider a finite potential, such as the finite square well or the potential 
in Fig. 9.4a. Each bound-state eigenfunction of such a potential encompasses several 
regions. We must impose boundary conditions in the first and last (classically forbidden) 
regions, where the function must monotonically decay to zero. The rate of this decay is 
controlled by the local decay constant k(x) —which, by its definition (9.11/;), is related 
to the (quantized) energy of the state and which, through the TISE (9.12/?), is related 
to the curvature of the function. So if the energy and curvature aren’t just right, the 
eigenfunction won’t decay—it will blow up. 

Between the first and last regions are one or more intermediate regions. The pieces 
of 'iPe{x) in these regions must hook together so that the composite spatial function is 
continuous and smoothly varying everywhere. But, because the pieces in the intermediate 
regions are determined by the values of and its first derivative at the boundaries 

of the first and last regions (see § 9.3), the role of the intermediate regions in quantization 
is secondary to that of the outer regions. 

To illustrate the relationship of quantization, curvature, and energy, let’s return to 
the generic continuous potential in Fig. 9.4a and take another look at the eigenfunction 
for the second excited state. If we imagine ourselves travelling in from ±oo, where 
ip 3 (x) = 0, we can see that the value of the local decay constant k(x), which controls 
the decay of this function to zero in the limit x —» ±oc, determines the value of this 
function and its slope at the classical turning points. As we cross these points, we must 
ensure that the pieces in the CF regions we’re leaving join continuously and smoothly 
to the piece in the CA region inside the well. For all these conditions to be met, the 
energy must be just right, E = E 3 . 

To see what can go wrong, let’s change the energy just a bit—increasing it, say, 
to E! s > E 3 (see Fig. 9.5a)—and solve the TISE anew. The resulting solution, which 
is sketched in Fig. 9.5a, and its first derivative are suitably continuous at the classical 
turning points. But in the CF regions, this function does not decay to zero; instead, it 
blows up as x —» ±oo. 


362 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 






Figure 9.5 Naughty eigenfunctions: solutions of the TISE (for the potential of Fig. 9.4a) 
that cannot represent physically admissible bound states. The eigenfunctions shown are 
those for an eigenvalue slightly (a) larger and (b) smaller than E 3 . [Adapted from 
Introduction to Quantum Physics by R. H. Dicke and J. P. Wittke (Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley, I960).] 


An equally impressive cataclysm occurs if we decrease the energy slightly, say to 
£3 < £3 in Fig. 9.5b. Again, the monotonic pieces of the solution for £3 in the CF 
regions blow up in the asymptotic limits. In either case, these exploding functions are 
perfectly legitimate mathematical solutions of the TISE; but they’re useless to us, for 
they cannot be inteipreted as a probability amplitude. 

The interplay of curvature, boundary conditions, and energy quantization that we 
have explored in one-dimensional systems characterizes all quantum systems that support 
bound states. We’ve seen that 


Rule 

A physically admissible bound-state eigenfunction of a continuous potential must decay to 
zero in two CF regions: one that includes x —> 00 and one that includes x —> - 00 . The 
monotonic pieces of this function must connect to pieces in the intermediate region(s) so as 
to preserve the continuity of the function and its first derivative. These inviolable demands 
quantize the energy of the particle and constrain the curvature of the wave function that 
represents its state. 


Sec. 9.2 Curvature Is the Key 363 









9.3 THE STATIONARY STATES OF AN ARBITRARY POTENTIAL 


‘My dear Watson, 

try a little analysis yourself,’ 

said he, with a touch of impatience. 

—from The Sign of Four 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 


In § 9.2, we saw how to use the interplay of boundary conditions, energy quanti¬ 
zation, and curvature to understand the shape of bound-state eigenfunctions of the finite 
square well, the harmonic oscillator, and a generic symmetric potential (Fig. 9.4a). Here 
I want to explore features of the collection of Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of a one¬ 
dimensional system; these features are invaluable guides to understanding the qualitative 
nature of these important functions. 

A somewhat more complicated potential is the “bistable” (double-dip) potential in 
Fig. 9.6a. The spatial functions for the three lowest stationary states of this potential are 
graphed in Fig. 9.6b. The behavior of each of these functions—their oscillations in the 
CA region, numerous nodes, and decay in the CF regions—is explicable in terms of the 
principles of § 9.2. 4 

Consider, for example, the ground-state function ipo(x). This function corresponds 
to the minimum allowed energy , so in the CA region it has the smallest curvature and 
no nodes. The local decay constant of the ground state is larger than that of any other 
stationary state, so in CF regions its ipo(x) decays to zero more rapidly than any other 
bound-state eigenfunction. 

Similar arguments explain the excited-state eigenfunctions. The energy of the first 
of these states, E\, is greater than that of the ground state, E 0 . The corresponding 
eigenfunction is the normalizable solution ^e(x) of the TISE for the value of E nearest 
to (but greater than) E 0 . Because E\ > E 0 , the local wavelength in the CA region of 
ipi(x) is less than that of if>o(x), and VhM has one more node than ipo(x). Can you 
see how to extend these arguments to the eigenfunction for the second excited state? 

Nodes 

Physically, the nodes of a wave function correspond to minima in the position probability 
density (c./., Fig. 8.23). In qualitative problem solving, the number of nodes of an 
eigenfunction is an important clue to its shape. And in quantitative problem solving, 
the number of nodes is a vital check on a numerical or analytic solution of the TISE. 
Here’s a handy summary of our deductions thus far concerning the nodal structure of 
the bound-state eigenfunctions (of a one-dimensional system): 


number of nodes in ip u (x) (if n = 1 labels the ground state) = n — 1 


(9.13) 


4 This potential, which is the sum of two hyperbolic cosine functions, is one of an interesting class of 
bistable potentials. One can solve the TISE of a particle in a bistable potential for low-lying bound states by 
analytic means. The strategy used to solve the particular bistable potential in Fig. 9.6 is the method of power 
series (sec § 9.7). For the details, sec M. Razavy, Amer. Jour. Pliys. 48, 285 (1980). Notice, by the way, that 
the ground state is labelled by n = 0, not n = 1. 


364 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



V[x) 



(a) 



Figure 9.6 (a) The bistable potential V(;r) = h 2 (cosh 4a; - 6 cosh 2a- - 1) fm and 
(b) its three lowest bound-state eigenfunctions. The energies of these states, on the scale 
shown in (a), are Eq = —5.12, E\ = —2.0, and E 2 = +3.12. (Note that the ground 
state is labelled with n = 0.) [From M. Razavy, Amer. Jour. Phys. 48, 285 (1980); 
used with permission.] 

Unlike some of our other tools (<?.#., parity arguments), the nodal characteristics of 
bound-state eigenfunctions don’t depend on the symmetry of the potential. To illustrate 
this point, let’s consider a state of a simple, asymmetric, piecewise-constant potential. 

Example 9.1. Deducing an Eigenfunction of the Asymmetric Square Well 

At ihe end of § 8.7, I discussed briefly the asymmetric square well (see also Pblm. 8.6). 
Let’s work out some of the qualitative properties of the eigenfunction for the first excited 
state of the potential (see Fig. 9.7) 


f 5 

x < 0 


V(a) = { 0 

0 < x < 4. 

(9.14) 

l2 

x > 4 



Note carefully that I’ve written this potential in atomic units (see Example 8.8 and Ap¬ 
pendix F). Notice also that since V(.t) is piecewise constant, the pieces ofipi(x) consist of 
the simple sine, cosine, and real exponential functions of Table 8.12 [see Eq. (8.101)]. 

The potential (9.14) supports two bound states. Numerical solution of the T1SE for 
this potential reveals that the energy of the first excited state is E 2 = 1 £7,. From this value, 


Sec. 9.3 The Stationary States of an Arbitrary Potential 365 




(a) 


Figure 9.7 (a) An asymmetric well 
potential. In Example 9.1, we consider 
the first excited state of this potential for 
well parameters V\ = 5 £/,, V 3 = 2 £/,, 
and L = 4«o. (b) A sketch of the 
eigenfunction for the first excited state 
of this potential; also shown is the 
corresponding eigenfunction for an infinite 
square well of the same width. 

we can calculate the wavelength in the CA region and the decay constants in the CF regions 


for this state, viz., 




/c (1) = 2.83 

(9.15a) 


A; (2) = 1.41 

(9.15/}) 

Question 9-2 

k (3) = 1.41. 

(9.15c) 


What are the (atomic) units of the quantities in Eqs. (9.15)? Convert each of these 

quantities to SI units (see Appendix D). 

One way to figure out the shape of ip 2 (x) is to consider the corresponding function for 
an infinite square well of the same width. This function, is sketched in Fig. 9.7b. 

It is a simple sine function of wavelength Ag = 4. The wavelength of the corresponding 
eigenfunction ^(x) of the finite well is slightly larger than this value; as you can see from 
Eq. (9. 15 /j), A 2 = 4.46. This means that almost a full oscillation of ip 2 {x) fits into the 
CA region of the asymmetric square well. But, unlike ^4°°*(a;), the finite-well function is 
not zero at the classical turning points, where it must hook continuously to monotonically 
decaying functions in Regions 1 and 3. 

The rates of decay of the pieces of ip 2 (x) in these CF regions are not equal, because 
the decay constant for Region 1 is larger than that for Region 3. Hence ip 2 [x) penetrates 
more deeply into the CF region x > L than into the CF region x < 0. In fact, the 
characteristic length for decay into Region 3 is 0.71 and for Region 1 is 0.35. 

Perhaps the most subtle feature of the eigenfunction foix) is the effect of this differ¬ 
ence in the characteristic lengths upon the location of the node in the CA region. Because 



366 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



-tp 2 (®) penetrates almost twice as deeply into the region x > L as it does into the region 
x < 0, the value of |^ 2 (®)| at x = L must be larger than the value at x = 0. Consequently 
the position of the node in ip 2 {x) must be to the right of the midpoint of the well, i.e ., at 
some x > L/ 2. 

Putting together these Sherlockian deductions, we come up with the sketch in Fig. 9.7b. 
(This sketch shows all the major features of the accurate, numerical solution of the TISE 
for this state.) Note that even though the potential (9.14) is certainly not symmetric, ip 2 {x) 
(like all eigenfunctions) conforms to the nodal structure (9.13). 

Question 9-3 

Sketch the eigenfunctions for the ground state of the potential in Fig. 9.7a. 

Question 9-4 

In Example 9.1, we used the value of E 2 to calculate the wavelength and decay 
constants of a stationary state. Doing so requires having solved the TISE, at least 
for the eigenvalues. But the arguments illustrated by this example don’t require 
knowledge of the energy or, indeed, of the parameters Vo and L that define the well. 
Consider an arbitrary asymmetric square well that supports at least three bound states. 
Sketch the eigenfunctions for these three states. 

A Note on Parity 

In § 8.7, I remarked that the bound stationary-state eigenfunctions of any symmetric 
potential have definite parity: they are either even or odd under inversion through the 
midpoint of the potential, which point we usually choose as x = 0. (We’ll prove this 
property in § 9.4.) Although not a consequence of the nodal structure of these functions, 
this “parity structure” is clearly related to the nodal structure, for an eigenfunction of 
definite parity can have a node at the midpoint of the potential only if the eigenfunction 
is odd. 

The relationship between parity and nodes explains why the parities of the eigen¬ 
functions of a symmetric potential alternate with increasing n. We start with the ground- 
state eigenfunction, which has the minimum (allowed) curvature and hence no nodes. 
Consistent with this fact, the ground-state eigenfunction is even. 

Going up the ladder of stationary bound states, we find that with each increase by 
1 of the quantum number n, the number of nodes increases by 1. The spatial function 
for the first excited state has a node at the midpoint of V(x), but the function for the 
second excited state does not. And so the parity of the eigenfunctions ip n (re) alternates: 
even, odd, even, odd, .... This property is illustrated for the symmetric finite square 
well in Figs. 8.23, for the double-dip potential in Fig. 9.6a, and for the simple harmonic 
oscillator in Fig. 9.14 below. 

One Last Trick: Amplitude Variation 

Before turning to the mathematical solution of the TISE, I want to show you one more 
feature of the qualitative solution of this equation: the variation of the amplitude of an 
eigenfunction in a CA region. 5 This property follows from the continuity conditions on 
iPe{x) and the variation of the local wavelength with E - V(x). 

5 The development in this section draws on the discussion in A. P. French and E. F. Taylor, 39, 961 

(1971). 


Sec. 9.3 The Stationary States of an Arbitrary Potential 367 



To deduce the principles of amplitude variation, we’ll consider the first excited 
state of the piecewise-constant potential in Fig. 9.8a. Notice that this potential is not 
symmetric. 



(a) 



Figure 9.8 (a) An asymmetric 
piecewise-constant potential whose change 
at x = L/2 causes the amplitude of its 
bound-state eigenfunctions to change at this 
point, (b) A sketch of the eigenfunction 
for the first-excited state of this potential 
and its counterpart for an infinite well of 
width L with V 3 = 0. 


Let’s see if we can figure out how the piece of the eigenfunction in the CA 

Region 2 differs from the piece in the CA Region 3. Since V 3 > V 2 , the wave numbers 
in Regions 2 and 3 bear the relationship k 3 < k 2 . So the de Broglie wavelengths of 
these pieces are 


A 2 = 



< A3 



(9.16) 


Since A 2 < A 3l the curvature of if)^\x), the piece in Region 2, is greater than that of 
'ipg\ x ), the piece in Region 3. 

To show you the consequences of this change in curvature and wavelength for the 
amplitude of the eigenfunction, I want to construct a function that is continuous across 
the boundary between Regions 2 and 3. [We can’t use the logarithmic derivative (§ 8.7) 
for this purpose, because when we form this quantity, by dividing dipE{x)/dx by tPe(x)> 
the amplitude of the eigenfunction cancels.] The particular function I want to construct 


368 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





involves the pieces of the eigenfunction in each region, the first derivatives of these 
pieces, and the wavelengths. 

Let’s start with the general form of the eigenfunction in each region. Since this 
potential is piecewise-constant , we can easily write down these forms using principles 
from Chap. 8 , viz., 

( x ) = C< 2 > cos k 2 x + DW sin k 2 x (9.1 la) 

^\x) = C {3) cos kzx + D^ sin k^x. (9. Mb) 

The constants and D make the manipulation of these fonns more complicated 
than necessary. So let’s use elementary trigonometry to rewrite Eq. (9.17) in terms of 
an amplitude G ^ and a phase constant (j) q , to wit: 


i$e\x) = G ^ sin (k 2 x + <f> 2 ) (9.18a) 

tPe\x) = G^ sin (k^x + <fo). (9.18/;) 

The first derivatives of these functions are 

= ^2 G (2) cos (k 2 x + (f> 2 ) (9.19a) 

ax 

-fV4 3| (x) = k 3 G w cos ( k 3 x + <t> 3 ) . (9.19*) 

ax 


If we now square Eqs. (9.18) and (9.19), add the results in each region, introduce 
the wavelengths (9.16), and rearrange a little, we obtain 


[v4 2) w] + 
K 3 ) w ] 2 + 


1 


(2tt) 2 

1 


Ao 


A? 




1 2 


n 2 


= K 

= [g <*>] 2 


(9.20a) 


(9.20/;) 


Look very carefully at Eqs. (9.20). They are written in terms of two quantities that must 
be continuous across the boundary between the classically-allowed regions : iPe{x) and 
d'tpE^/dx. Consider values of re extremely near this boundary. The wavelengths on the 
right-hand side change abruptly across the boundary, A 3 > A 2 . But the eigenfunction on 
the left-hand side must be continuous, so to compensate for the change in the wavelength, 
the amplitudes on the right-hand side must be related by G (2) < G^. 

This derivation confirms the principle used to draw the sketch in Fig. 9.8b: the 
amplitude of the spatial function is larger in the region where the wavelength of the 
function is larger. 

We can generalize these findings to a continuous potential by imagining such a 
potential as an infinite number of piecewise-constant pieces (c./.. Fig. 8.2). We must, of 
course, keep in mind that the amplitude of a spatial function for a continuous potential 
is not constant. So the continuous variation in E - V{x) causes a continuous change in 
the curvature and the amplitude of i^e{x) of the following sort: 


Rule 

The amplitude of an oscillatory piece of a bound-state spatial function increases with de¬ 
creasing curvature, i.e., with increasing wavelength. 


Sec. 9.3 The Stationary States of an Arbitrary Potential 369 




As a final illustration of this rule, consider the bound-state eigenfunctions of the 
harmonic oscillator potential (§ 9.8) shown in Fig. 9.16. Notice the pronounced variation 
of the amplitude of states of high quantum number n. 

Question 9-5 

Explain how to justify this generalization by representing a continuous potential as an infinite 
number of infinitesimally small steps, as in Fig. 8.2. 

Question 9-6 

Suppose that the first derivative of iPe(x) happens to be zero at a step increase in a piecewise- 
constant potential like the one in Fig. 9.8a. Show that the amplitude of such an eigenfunction 
does not change across the region boundary. 


*9.4 MATHEMATICAL PROPERTIES OF BOUND-STATE 
EIGENFUNCTIONS 

In our inquiry into the qualitative nature of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions for bound 
states of a one-dimensional potential, we’ve uncovered several important properties: 

1 . ip u {x) must go to zero in the asymptotic limits x —> ±oc; 

2 . ip n (x) and d'ip„(x)/dx must be continuous everywhere; 

3. the curvature of Tp n (x) varies with \E — V(a;)|, and influences the wave properties 
of this function as follows: 


(9.21) 


4. i}) n {x) has n — 1 nodes (if n — 1 denotes the ground state); 

5. for a symmetric potential , the eigenfunctions / ip n (x) alternate parity with increasing 
n, beginning with an even ground-state ^)\(x). 

Before turning to the mathematical solution of the TISE, I want to prove for you the 
last of these properties: the parity of the eigenfunctions of a symmetric potential. 6 But 
before we can prove this property, we must prove that the functions we’re talking about 
are unique. 

On the Uniqueness of Bound Stationary-State 
Eigenfunctions 

The uniqueness of physically admissible solutions of the one-dimensional TISE follows 
from the fact that this is a second-order ordinary differential equation. For each value 
of E , this equation has two linearly-independent solutions. But, since the TISE is 
homogeneous, any linear combination of these functions is a third solution (for the same 
energy); so actually there exist an infinite number of solutions. We select one out of 

G If you choose lo omil this section, at least read the two Proclamations in it. 

370 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





this infinite pile of solutions by specifying the value of the eigenfunction and its first 
derivative at a single point or, equivalently, the value of the eigenfunction at two points. 7 
Of all these solutions, we want the one that satisfies property [1] above: the normalizable 
solution. We know from § 9.2 that normalizable solutions to the TISE don’t exist for 
all values of E. But here I want to consider a related question that arises once we have 
found a normalizable solution: is it unique? 


Proclamation 9.1 

Normalizable solutions of the one-dimensional TISE are unique (to within an arbitrary global 
phase factor). 


Argument: We’ll prove this assertion using the time-honored technique of proof by 
contradiction. That is, we’ll pretend that Proclamation 9.1 is false— e.g., that there exist 
two distinct solutions of the TISE for a single energy, say ip n (x) and Xn{x): 

(fi 2m 

(z) = - -^2 [ E n - V (*)] n {%) (9.22 a) 

(9.22 b) 

Then from Eqs. (9.22) we’ll derive a relationship between ip»(x) and Xn(x) that unmasks 
these two functions as aliases of one another— i.e., we’ll prove that these functions 
represent the same physical state. Two such functions are not distinct, so our relationship 
will contradict the supposition, thereby proving the proclamation. 8 

To relate ^ u (x) and Xn{x), let’s combine Eqs. (9.22 a) and (9.22/;) by multiplying 
the first by x»(a:) and the second by V'nM and subtracting the results, viz., 

d 2 d 2 

Xn {x)—^tp n (x) - l}) n {x)-T~^Xn ( x ) = 0. (9.23) 

dx* dx* 

A clever way to simplify Eq. (9.23) is to reduce the order of differentiation by rewriting 
the left-hand side as a total derivative, 


d_ 

dx 


- ll>n(x)^Xn(x) 


= 0 . 


Integrating this equation, we obtain 


Xn{x)^ n {x) - 1p n (x)-^Xn{x) 


= constant. 


(9.24a) 


(9.24/;) 


Question 9-7 

If you are not familiar with this step, take a few minutes to verify that Eq. (9.24a) is 
equivalent to Eq. (9.23). Then take a few more minutes to memorize this trick —it will 
serve you long and well. 


7 That is why the value of ij>g(x) and its first derivative at the boundary between an outer CF region 
and the adjacent CA region determine the function i!>e( x )- 

8 The word “distinct” here is critical. Recall (Chap. 3) that two wave functions are distinct if they 
represent different quantum states of the systems. But two wave functions that differ only by a global phase 
factor represent the same physical state and so are not distinct. 


Sec. 9.4 Mathematical Properties of Bound-State Eigenfunctions 371 




Now, what is the value of the constant in Eq. (9.24/;)? Well, the left-hand side of 
this equation must, obviously, be the same for all x. We know the values of ip n (a:) and 
Xn(%) (even for an arbitrary potential) in the limits x —» oo and x —> —oo: they are 
zero. So the constant in (9.24/;) must be zero, and we can write this equation as 


1 d 
*l> n {x) dx 


1>n(x) 


1 d 

Xn (®) dx 


Xn(x). 


(9.25) 


We can now integrate Eq. (9.25) to obtain the simple relationship 


In if>„(x) = lnx„(rc) + C, 


(9.26) 


where C is the constant of integration. Hence the solutions of Eqs. (9.22) are proportional: 

*»(*) = Cty„(s). (9.27) 

But the constant of proportionality in Eq. (9.27) is not arbitrary. Both ^„(a :) and 
X„(z) must be normalizable, i.e., 

[ 1>n (®) i>n (x) dx = [ Xn( X ) Xn (®) dx = 1, (9.28) 

J —oo J—oo 

and these conditions can be satisfied only if the modulus of C is unity. So C must have 
the form C = e' 6 , where 8 is an arbitrary real constant. Hence our two supposedly 
distinct solutions of the TISE are related by 

= (9.29) 

Ah ha!—the constant e' 6 is just a global phase factor. Such a factor is physically 
meaningless, because it disappears from such measurable quantities as observables and 
probabilities (§ 3.5). So the wave functions 

<=> e i V„(x)e- , ' E "' /, ' (9.30) 

are physically equivalent, which means that ip n (.-r) and Xn i x ) are not distinct solutions 
to (9.22). This contradiction of our premise proves that each normalizable bound-state 
eigenfunction of a one-dimensional Hamiltonian is unique. 

Q. E. D. 

This proof establishes a one-to-one correspondence between the energies of bound 
stationary states and the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian, 



(9.31) 


Physicists express this correspondence as follows: 


Rule 

The bound-state energies of a single particle in a one-dimensional potential are non-degener¬ 
ate. (This rule does not apply to potentials in more than one dimension or to systems 
consisting of more than one particle.) 


372 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




Question 9-8 

Apply the result we just proved to the function Xn( x ) — ^«(x) and thereby prove that we 
are always free to choose the eigenfunctions of a single particle in one dimension to be real 
functions. 


The Consequences of Symmetry 

Now that we have established the uniqueness of the bound-state eigenfunctions of a 
one-dimensional potential, we can prove: 


Proclamation 9.2 

The bound-state eigenfunctions of a symmetric potential have definite parity. 


Argument: To detennine the parity of a function, we invert the spatial coordinate x 
through the origin, i.e., x —> —x. Since we’re interested in the behavior of a solution of 
the TISE under this operation, let’s see what happens when we invert x in this equation. 
The symmetric potential doesn’t change, 

V{— re) = V(x), symmetric potential (9.32) 

so under this inversion, the TISE is transformed into 9 

a/2 O 772 

~ V(x)]M-x)- (9-33) 

This equation is identical to the TISE; i.e., Tp n (-x) satisfies the same differential equation 
as does And x) satisfies the same boundary conditions as does ?/>„(x). 

But for a given allowed energy, there is only one distinct, normalizable Hamiltonian 
eigenfunction (see Proclamation 9.1). So VhiM and must be related by Eq. 

(9.29), 

^„(-x) = e ,s 1> n (x). (9.34) 


Since we’re free to choose -0,, (x) to be real (see Question 9-8), the factor in Eq. (9.34) 
is e' 6 = ±1, i.e.. 


tpn{-x) = 


(9.35) 


Therefore each eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian for a symmetric potential is either even 
or odd under inversion through x = 0. 

Q. E. D. 

Proclamation 9.2 is the first of many symmetry arguments you’ll encounter in 
your study of quantum physics. I cannot overstate the power of symmetry. It is little 
exaggeration to say that when you perceive the symmetry properties of a system (i.e., of 


3 Thc second derivative does not change under this inversion, because 

d_ _ d _ d 2 

dx t—-x dx dx 2 r-+-.c d x 2 


Sec. 9.4 Mathematical Properties of Bound-State Eigenfunctions 373 





its potential), you peer into the deepest level of its physics. And such arguments have a 
practical side, for they invariably simplify the solution of the Schrodinger Equation. 


9.5 THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR MADE SIMPLE 


Yet my classic lore aggressive 
(If you’ll pardon the possessive) 
Is exceedingly impressive 
When you’re passing an exam. 
—from The Grand Duke 
by Gilbert and Sullivan 


Harmonic oscillators are useful models of complicated potentials in a variety of disci¬ 
plines—including the quantum theory of electromagnetic radiation, the study of lattice 
vibrations in crystalline solids, and the analysis of infrared spectra of diatomic molecules 
(§ 9.6). You probably remember the classical description of oscillatory motion from 
a high school or freshman physics class in which you studied the simple harmonic 
oscillator (SHO). Actually, classical systems rarely execute simple oscillatory motion; 
more often they undergo damped or forced harmonic motion. 10 But even if particles 
execute “complicated” harmonic motion, their small excursions about equilibrium can be 
accurately approximated by the simple harmonic oscillator. So the SHO is the starting 
point for study of any system whose particles oscillate about equilibrium positions. 

What is “Simple” Harmonic Motion? 

Consider a point moving serenely along the circumference of a circle at a constant 
angular frequency a>o, as in Fig. 9.9. The projection of this point on the diameter of the 
circle, x(t) in the figure, executes simple harmonic motion; i.e., x(t) changes with time 
according to a simple equation involving the frequency u> 0 , the amplitude of motion A, 
and a phase constant <£: 

x(t) = A sin [u{)t + (j >). simple harmonic motion (9.36) 

The angular frequency u>q is usually called the natural frequency. The classical oscil¬ 
lation frequency i/ 0 is related to the natural frequency by i/ 0 = a»o/(27r). 

The relationship of the function (9.36) to its second derivative is also simple: 


^x(t) = -wfc(t). (9.37) 

This is the famous differential equation of simple harmonic motion. Notice that the 
amplitude and phase constant have disappeared from Eq. (9.37). 


10 This section consists primarily of a review of the physics of classical simple harmonic motion. For 
a more advanced treatment, see Chaps. 4 and 5 of Classical Dynamics of Panicles and Systems, 2nd ed. by J. 
B. Marion (New York: Academic Press, 1970) or any other undergraduate classical mechanics text. 


374 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




Figure 9.9 Simple harmonic motion. The 
projection on the diameter of a circle of a 
point moving along the circumference. 


The Macroscopic Simple Harmonic Oscillator 


The most famous simple harmonic oscillator is the mass on a spring in Fig. 9.10a. 11 If 
the wall to which the spring is hooked is immovable, and if the spring is “ideal” (i.e., has 
no mass and doesn’t deform), and if friction and gravity are negligible, then the force 
on the mass acts to restore it to its equilibrium position x e , as illustrated in Fig. 9.10b. 
The force exerted by a spring with force constant kf is linear: 

force on mass m = -kf(x - x c ) Hooke’s Law. (9.38) 

The corresponding trajectory z(£), derived from Newton’s Second Law, is 

d? kt , , 

— x (t) = -J- x{ t). (9.39) 

Adroitly noticing the similarity between Eq. (9.39) and the mathematical equation of 
simple harmonic motion, (9.37), we conclude that the mass is a simple harmonic oscillator 
whose natural frequency is related to the physical properties of the system (the mass and 
the force constant of the spring) by 



(9.40) 


In practice, the amplitude and phase constant in the trajectory (9.36) are determined from 
the initial conditions z(£o). 

The potential energy of the particle follows simply from the force (9.38), 12 


V (z) = — (Force on mass m) dx 

1 . 2 1 2 2 
= 2 k f x = 2 muJ o x » 


(9.4 \a) 
(9 Alb) 


11 For a review of this classic example of classical simple harmonic motion, see Chap. 14 of Funda¬ 
mentals of Physics, 2nd ed. by D. Halliday and R. Resnick (New York: Wiley, 1981) or. at a more advanced 
level, Chap. 2 of Mechanics, 3rd ed. by K. R. Synion (Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley. 1971). 

1 :2 Actually, the integral in (9.4lo) determines K(.t) only to within an arbitrary constant, the zero of 
energy, which I’ll choose at the bottom of the well. 


Sec. 9.5 The Harmonic Oscillator Made Simple 375 





-x £ 0 x E x 

(b) (c) 


Figure 9.10 (a) A mass on a spring. The mass moves only in the .t direction under 
the influence of the linear restoring force shown in (b). (c) The potential energy that 
derives from this force. Also shown are the classical turning points ±xe for a particle 
with total energy E. 


as shown in Fig. 9.9c. The total energy of the particle is just V (rc) plus its kinetic energy, 
i.e., 

E = ^—h Jmw lx 2 . (9.42) 

2771 2 

The total energy is, of course, conserved. 

As the particle oscillates back and forth, its kinetic energy and hence its speed 
changes because the potential energy in (9.42) changes. For example, at equilibrium, the 
particle’s potential energy is zero. So its speed is greatest at this point. On the other 
hand, the particle’s kinetic energy is zero at the classical turning points, 



classical turning points of the SHO 


(9.43) 


So as it nears these points, the particle slows down; at them, it stops dead in its tracks 
and turns around. 

From these observations we can predict the outcome of a measurement of the po¬ 
sition of a classical simple harmonic oscillator. Were we to perform such a measurement 
at an arbitrary time during one period of oscillation, we’d most likely find the particle 
at positions where its speed is the smallest, i.e., near the classical turning points. Later 
in this chapter, we’ll compare this prediction with what quantum physics predicts for a 


376 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



microscopic oscillator. To prepare for this comparison, let’s construct the classical coun¬ 
terpart of the quantum-mechanical probability density—the classical position probability 
density P c \(x) —and write this quantity in terms of x and E. 

The Classical Probability Density 


To define a probability we must first identify an ensemble (§ 3.3): a large number of 
identical, non-interacting systems, all in the same state. But in a position measurement 
at a fixed time, all members of an ensemble of macroscopic particles would yield the 
same result. So to develop a classical probability function we must adapt the concept of 
an ensemble to a macroscopic system. In this section only, I’ll deviate from our usual use 
of the word “ensemble.’’ Here we’ll assume that the positions of members of the ensemble 
are measured at random times. 13 In such a measurement, particles will be found at 
various places along the trajectory of the state, so the results will fluctuate according to 
the probability function we’ll now derive. 

By analogy with the quantum-mechanical position probability density, we define 
the classical position probability density as 


P c \{x)dx = 


probability of finding the particle in the 
interval x to x + dx. 


(9.44) 


Although we seek an expression for P c \(x) in terms of x and E, our starting point is the 
definition (9.44), which involves time. 

The time required for the particle to cany out one cycle of simple harmonic motion 
is the classical period T 0 , 

2n 

To = —. period of a classical simple harmonic oscillator (9.45) 

tu 0 


[Don’t confuse the period with the kinetic energy T = p 2 /(2m)]. So the probability 
function (9.44) is the fraction of one period that the particle spends in the interval dx at 
x, i.e ., 


P c \(x)dx = ~ 
1 o 


classical probability density 


(9.46) 


Now let’s transfonn (9.46) into an expression in the variable x. 

The infinitesimal dt is related to an infinitesimal of position, dx , by the velocity 
v = dx/dt. Using this fact and Eq. (9.45), we can eliminate t from P c \(x ), viz., 

P c \{x) dx =^--dx. (9.47) 

Z7T v 


Now we must express v in terms of a; and E. This isn’t hard for the simple harmonic 
oscillator, because we know the trajectory, (9.36), viz., 14 


13 There is an alternate way to define an ensemble of macroscopic systems so that the members will 
exhibit different values of an observable: randomize the initial conditions. But this approach is inappropriate 
to the present argument, for systems with different initial conditions are not in the same physical state. 

14 To avoid clutter in these equations, I’ve chosen the initial conditions so that the phase constant is 
(j> = 0. Convince yourself that this choice corresponds to a state in which the particle is initially at the 
rightmost classical turning point, i.e., to x(to) = +xe- 


Sec. 9.5 The Harmonic Oscillator Made Simple 377 




x(t) = XEsm(uot) 
v(t) = uqXe cos (a> 0 i). 


(9.48cr) 

(9.48/;) 


Since v(£) involves the cosine of a; 0 £ and x(t) involves the sine of the same argument, we 
can combi ne Eqs. (9.4 8) according to the familiar trigonometric identity (see Appendix H) 
cos 9 = y/l — sin 2 9, obtaining 


= loqXe 




— nr? 


(9.49) 


Using this result, we can express the classical probability as a function of x , to wit: 


P c \{x ) dx = 


wo _1 .11 

- ^ d,Q£ nz- . H X 

27T o; 0 \Jx\ - x 2 27t sjx\ - x 2 


(9.50) 


This function is the relative probability that in a measurement at a random time of the 
position of a macroscopic simple harmonic oscillator with energy E t we’ll obtain a value 
in the infinitesimal range dx at x. Notice carefully that the dependence of this quantity 
on energy is implicit in the classical turning points under the square root sign [c./., 
Eq. (9.43)]. Alas, we cannot meaningfully compare Eq. (9.50) to the usual quantum 
probability density. Can you figure out what is wrong and how to fix it? 


*** Pause while reader ponders *** 


Right: P c \(x) is a relative probability density. We must normalize this function 
so that, like its quantum cousin, it satisfies 



dx = 1. 


(9.51) 


The absolute normalized classical probability density is 


Pc\(x) = 


1 

Tty/ X \ ~ X 2 


simple harmonic oscillator 


(9.52) 


Question 9-9 

Derive Eq. (9.52), using the integral 



dx = 7T. 


Make explicit the energy dependence of this function, obtaining 
378 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





(9.53) 


This function is sketched in Fig. 9.11 at three energies, which just happen to equal 
those of three stationary states of the microscopic simple harmonic oscillator in § 9.8. Re¬ 
assuringly, these sketches are consonant with our classical expectations: P c \(x) predicts 
that a macroscopic simple harmonic oscillator is least likely to be found at equilibrium, 
where it is moving most rapidly, and most likely to be found near the classical turning 
points, at which points it will stop and turn around. 




-1 -5 -3 -1 0 1 3 5 7 x 

(0 

Figure 9.11 The classical probability function for three energies. These energies corre¬ 
spond to those of the ground state (n = 0), the first excited state (?i = 1), and the tenth 
excited state (n = 10) of a microscopic oscillator with mass m and natural frequency 
wo (compare to Fig.9.15). 


Sec. 9.5 The Harmonic Oscillator Made Simple 379 









*9.6 AN APPLICATION: THE VIBRATIONS OF A DIATOMIC 
MOLECULE 


Isn’t it astonishing that 

all these secrets have been preserved 

for so many years 

just so that we could discover them! 

—Orville Wright 
June 7, 1903 


One of the most interesting applications of the microscopic simple harmonic oscillator is 
to contemporary research on molecular vibrations. 15 Molecules are complicated beasties, 
and understanding their structure and spectra requires coping with complicated, non- 
spherical potentials generated by two or more force centers (the nuclei) and by lots of 
electrons. Fortunately, one can study the physics of the nuclei and electrons of most 
molecules separately. 

A diatomic molecule consists of two positively-charged nuclei (of mass ~ 10 -28 kg) 
and a bunch of electrons (each of mass m c = 9.1 x 10 -31 kg). If the molecule is elec¬ 
trically neutral, there are enough bound electrons that their total negative charge exactly 
cancels the positive charge of the nuclei. In nature, bound states of molecules abound— 
which leads one to wonder: What holds a molecule together? 

The subject of molecular binding is, to say the least, vast. 16 Some molecules ( e.g. y 
NaCl) are held together by ionic bonds in which (crudely speaking) the molecule is 
bound by electrical forces between the composite positively and negatively charged ions. 
Others are held together by covalent bonds , where the reason for stability is more subtle. 
In such a molecule, the bound electrons, which are in a stationary “electronic state,” 
provide a potential energy that supports several bound stationary states of the nuclei. 17 

Were the nuclei of a diatomic molecule macroscopic particles, their geometry would 
resemble the dumbbell in Fig. 9.12. Three kinds of nuclear motion occur: 

1. translation through space; 

2. rotation about the internuclear axis or about an axis perpendicular to this one; 

3. vibration along the internuclear axis. 

It is the last of these quantum “motions” that, for certain quantum states, can be approx¬ 
imated by simple harmonic motion. 


15 This section is just an extended example designed to convince you that the harmonic oscillator is 
worth the work we’re about to put into it and to give you insight into how it can be used as a model. You can 
skip this section and still handle the rest of the chapter without difficulty. 

lc For a brief overview, see Chap. 11 of Quantum States of Atoms, Molecules, and Solids by M. A. 
Morrison, T. L. Estle, and N. F. Lane (Englewood-Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1977). For more detail, see 
Bonding Theory by Donald J. Royer (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968) or nearly any chemistry text. 

l7 This is a crude statement of one of the theoretical bulwarks of molecular physics: The Bom- 
Oppenheimer approximation. This approximation is based on the relative masses of the electrons and nuclei: 
the former are orders of magnitude lighter than the latter, and so respond very quickly to changes in the nuclear 
geometry. We can conjure an (admittedly crude) analog of this approximation by imagining two hippopotami 
in a swamp. Surrounding the hippos is a swarm of mosquitos. As the hapless hippos lumber about, the 
light, carefree mosquitos whiz around, readjusting their positions in response to changes in the “dihippo force 
centers”—their goal being to maximize their blood intake. For a somewhat more scholarly discussion of this 
approximation, see Chap. 12 of Quantum States of Atoms, Molecules, and Solids by M. A. Morrison, T. L. 
Estle, and N. F. Lane (Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Prentice Hall, 1977). 


380 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



o- 

e z = R 

Figure 9.12 A schematic of the nuclei of 
a diatomic molecule. 

The variable that describes the vibrations of the nuclei in a diatomic molecule is the 
internuclear separation, R in Fig. 9.12. Rather like two masses connected by a spring, 
the nuclei vibrate about the equilibrium internuclear separation R = R e . Typically, the 
equilibrium internuclear separation of molecules is roughly an angstrom. For example, 
R c for H '2 is 0.7414 A, but for Kr- 2 , R e is 4.0 A. You will find additional data for 
diatomic molecules in Table 9.1. 18 


TABLE 9.1 PROPERTIES OF DIATOMIC MOLECULES 
(AND A COUPLE OF IONS). 


molecule" 

Re( A) 

A.y(x 10 2 N-m) 

ftw 0 (eV) 

g(amu) 

H + 

1.05 

1.60 

0.2879 

0.504 

h 2 

0.7414 

5.75 

0.546 

0.504 

Li-2 

2.673 

0.25 

0.0436 

3.470 

f 2 

1.412 

4.70 

0.1136 

9.50 

N+ 

1.1164 

20.1 

0.2737 

7.003 

n 2 

1.0977 

23.0 

0.2924 

7.003 

CO 

1.1283 

19.0 

0.2690 

6.8608 

HF 

0.9168 

9.66 

0.5131 

0.957 

HCI 

1.2746 

5.17 

0.3708 

0.980 

HBr 

1.4144 

4.11 

0.3284 

0.995 

Kr 2 

4.0 

0.014 

0.003 

41.90 


fI In the ground electronic state. 

Source: Data from Table 10.2 of Reference Data for Atoms, Molecules, 
and tons, A. A. Radzig and B. M. Smirnov (New York: Springer- 
Verlag, 1985). 


*4 

i 

I R 


-o- 7 y 

/ 

/ 



Consider, for example, the hydrogen molecule. Figure 9.13 shows the electronic 
potential energy in which the two protons of this molecule vibrate. It is easy to understand 
the large-scale features of these curves. As the nuclei get very close together (R —> 0) 
their repulsion overwhelms the attractive electron-nuclei interactions, and the potential 
asymptotically approaches Too. As the nuclei separate, they ultimately dissociate into 
neutral atoms or ions; this behavior is reflected in the slow decay of V(R) as R —*■ oo. 19 

The lowest-lying curve in this figure is the ground electronic state , which is attrac¬ 
tive and which supports several bound vibrational states. But, although the motion of 
the nuclei in this state is oscillatory, it is not simple harmonic. 

18 And you can find absolutely everything you might want to know about the properties of diatomic 
molecules in the heroic data compilation Constants of Diatomic Molecules by K. P. Huber and G. Herzberg 
(New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979). 

lu For a more detailed introductory look at the forces responsible for such potentials, see Chap. 5 of 
Spectroscopy and Molecular Structure by G. NV. King (New York: Holt, Rinehardt, and Winston, 1974). 


Sec. 9.6 An Application: The Vibrations of a Diatomic Molecule 381 






Figure 9.13 The electronic potential energies of several states of the H 2 molecule. The 
ground-state and three excited states (two attractive and one repulsive) are shown. The 
horizontal dashed line is the ionization limit of H 2 ; the curves above this line represent 
electronic states of the Hj ion. [Adapted from the complete potential energy curve in 
T. Sharp, Atomic Data , 2, 119 (1971).] 


The function V(R) deviates from that of a simple harmonic oscillator because the 
restoring forces that act on the nuclei are not linear. But consider values of R very near 
the minimum of the well— i.e., consider small excursions from equilibrium, R « R e . 
Here the potential energy is roughly quadratic in the displacement R - R e . Denoting 
this displacement by 


x = R — R c , displacement from equilibrium (9.54a) 

we can write an approximate potential energy for small-amplitude vibrations, in terms 
of the force constant kj of the molecule, as 20 

K(.t) = k f x 2 / 2. (9.54/;) 

How good an approximation is the simple harmonic oscillator? In Fig. 9.14, this 
potential is compared to a very accurate model of a true electronic energy curve, the 
Morse potential (c./., Fig. 8.2). The Morse potential lacks some of the simplifying 
features of the simple harmonic oscillator: it is not symmetric and does not increase to 
infinity as R —» 00 . Consequently, the Morse potential supports only a finite number 

20 The nuclei of a polyatomic molecule (i.e., one with more than two of the little beggars) can execute 
a number of different kinds of vibrational motion, each of which is called a normal mode of vibration. The 
easiest road to insight into the (vibrational) physics of such molecules is via a powerful and beautiful branch 
of mathematics called group theory. See, for example, Chemical Applications of Group Theory , 2nd ed. by 
F. A. Cotton (New York: Wiley, 1971). 


382 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





Figure 9.14 The simple harmonic 
oscillator (dashed curve) and a more 
accurate model of a molecular electronic 
potential energy, the Morse potential (solid 
curve). 


of bound states, and its bound-state eigenfunctions don’t have definite parity. These 
differences notwithstanding, the low energies and eigenfunctions of the simple harmonic 
oscillator are surprisingly good approximations to a more accurate solution of the TISE 
for nuclear vibrations. 

Aside: Molecular Vibrations in the Laboratory. Experimentalists studying molec¬ 
ular vibrations measure such molecular properties as the natural frequencies and force 
constants in Table 9.1. A widely-used method for such measurements is observation 
of photons emitted or absorbed when a transition occurs between two stationary vibra¬ 
tional states. From measured spectra, physicists can also determine other quantities 
crucial to understanding the physics of the molecule, quantities such as the dipole 
moment function D(R). 21 

The dipole moment of a molecule is analogous to that of a classical charge 
distribution. Assuming that the only motion the nuclei execute is vibrational, one 
finds that the most probable transition is one in which the vibrational quantum number 
n changes by one unit. These transitions are well described by the simple harmonic 
oscillator model. (The analysis of molecular spectra is complicated by the fact that real 
molecules rotate as well as vibrate. We’ll learn how to represent molecular rotations 
in Part VI, where we’ll discover that, like the vibrational energy, the rotational energy 
of a molecule is quantized. In the analysis of a real molecule, we must take such 
rotations into account.) 

In the lab, one cannot measure directly the function D(R), because the min¬ 
imum vibrational energy of a molecule is non-zero, i.e., in every state, the nuclei 
vibrate. So spectroscopists measure two quantities from which they construct the 
dipole moment function D(R). From the (infrared) transition intensities they can 
deduce the slope dD(R)/dR at R e . And, by studying the response of the molecule 
to an external electric field (see Volume II), they can figure out the expectation values 
of D(R) in the various stationary vibrational states. For example, the dipole moment 
of HC1 (at equilibrium) is 1.085 x 10“ 18 SC-cm and its derivative (at equilibrium) is 
0.86 x 10“ 16 SC. 22 


21 See, for example, § 4.12 of Molecular Structure and Dynamics by W. H. Flygare (Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J. Prentice Hall, 1978). 

22 W. S. Benedict etal.,J. Client. Phys. 26, 1671 (1957). 


Sec. 9.6 An Application: The Vibrations of a Diatomic Molecule 383 



Question 9-10 

The measured natural frequency of the HC1 molecule is wo = 8.65 x 10 13 Hz. Calculate 
the force constant kf of this molecule. (Don’t forget to use the reduced mass of the nuclei 
in your calculation.) 


9.7 THE QUANTUM SIMPLE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR- 
SOLVED! 


The Hamiltonian of the simple harmonic oscillator is 




i 


n = -^ + 1 2 mU ° x2 - 


simple harmonic oscillator 


(9.55) 


1 


E n - ^mulx 2 


^n(®) 


(9.56) 


The solutions of the TISE 
d?_ 
dx 2 

comprise the spatial parts of the stationary-state wave functions of this system, 

'Mx,«) = V’,>(z)e“ i£ "‘ / \ (9.57) 




where E n is one of the allowed energies of the oscillator. Because V(x) increases 
without limit as \x\ increases, it supports an infinite number of bound states but no 
continuum states. So in any stationary state, the particle is localized in the vicinity of 
the well, i.e.y 

P n (x,t) ->0. (9.58) 

X —*±oc 


Question 9-11 

Is Eq. (9.58) correct for a non-stationary state ? Before you answer, think carefully about 
how a non-stationary state is related to the stationary states of a system. (We’ll study a 
non-stationary state of this system in § 9.10). 


We know from § 9.1-9.3 that each state (9.57) is non-degenerate (unique), and 
that we can take each ipnix) to be real. We also know that, because the potential in 
the Hamiltonian (9.55) is symmetric, its eigenfunctions have definite parity, beginning 
with the even ground state. Finally, from curvature arguments we know that ii) n {x) 
has n nodes. [Note carefully that, in contrast to Eq. (9.13), the ground state is labelled 
with n = 0, as ipo{x)]. These qualitative deductions are all very well, but how do we 
solve (9.56) for the bound-state eigenfunctions and energies? Therein lies the tale of this 
section. 


The Plan of Attack 

Mathematicians often solve second-order differential equations with the method of 
power series. Unfortunately, for Eq. (9.56), the method doesn’t work. 23 But we can 
transform Eq. (9.56) into an equation for which the method does work. Once we have 

23 Direct application of this method to Eq. (9.56) leads to a three-term recurrence relation. But the 
solution of this equation contains at most two arbitrary constants, which is one too few. The problem is that 
this equation has a singularity at ±oo. 


384 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



done so, we simply expand the unknown function in our new equation in a power series, 
insert the series into the differential equation, and solve for the expansion coefficients. 
Table 9.2 contains an overview of the steps we’ll carry out, so you can follow along. 


TABLE 9.2 GAME PLAN FOR SOLUTION OF THE TISE OF THE SHO. 


Step 1: Clean up TISE using intermediate quantities 

ip E (x) -* V> € (0 

Step 2: Find the solution in the asymptotic limit £ —» oo 

V’eC'c) -* Xas(0 

Step 3: Factor out the asymptotic behavior 

MO « ah e (Ox -(0 

Step 4: Derive a DE for the unknown factor 

equation for H E (0 

Step 5: Expand the unknown function in a power series 

tfE«)=E c >e' 

Step 6: Put series in DE & derive recurrence relation 

Cj in terms of Cj_i 

Step 7: Enforce boundary conditions 

quantize E n 


Cleaning Up Our Act 


To minimize the number of symbols we must manipulate, let’s rewrite the Schrodinger 
equation in terms of intermediate variables and parameters. These intermediate quanti¬ 
ties, which are summarized in Table 9.3, are suggested by the mathematical structure of 
the TISE we’re trying to solve, 


d?_ 
dx 2 


9 *.2 

771 U>q 2 

h 2 


+ 


2m E 


e(oc ) = 0. 


(9.59) 


TABLE 9.3 INTERMEDIATE QUANTITIES FOR THE TISE 
OF THE SHO. 


Quantity 

Definition 

Units 

energy 

potential strength 

position 

h u>o 

0 = y/mu> o/h 
t = 0x 

dimensionless 

(length) -1 

dimensionless 


First, we scale x by the potential strength parameter (d = y/muo/h to produce 
the dimensionless variable £ = (dx. Instead of solving an equation [(9.59)] in x for a 
function of x, iPe{%)> we’ll transform (9.59) into an equation in £ and solve for iPe{€)- 
Using the chain rule of differentiation to determine the required derivatives, we find 

dip d£ dip dip 
dx = dxd^ =fj d^ 
d 2 ip _ d d£ f dip \ _ 2 
dx 2 d£ dx \dx) d £ 2 

Sec. 9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 385 


(9.60a) 
(9.60 b) 




Introducing the energy variable e = 2E/(fiujo) t we can write the transformed Schrodinger 
equation for the simple harmonic oscillator in the elegant form 24 



= o 


Weber's equation 


(9.61) 


Equation (9.61) is probably unfamiliar to you. But a practicing mathematician 
would recognize it as Weber’s equation. Weber’s equation is one of several differential 
equations whose analytic solutions have been exhaustively studied and tabulated. Be¬ 
cause of their importance in applied mathematics, these are called special functions. 25 
You will meet several special functions in this book, beginning with Hermite polynomials 
later in this section. 

Since the solutions to Weber’s equation are known, we could just write them down 
and quit. But we wouldn’t learn much. Many and varied are the differential equations 
of physics that can’t be solved by well-known, well-studied, well-tabulated functions; 
and you must know how to cope with them. So let’s press on with the plan outlined in 
Table 9.2 and solve Weber’s equation. 

What Happens at Infinity 

One of the first things you should check when confronted by an unfamiliar differential 
equation is its behavior in the asymptotic limits of its variable. Some equations blow 
up in these limits—in which case we must factor out the asymptotic behavior of the 
unknown function before we can get down to solving the equation by a method such as 
expansion in a power series. (Mathematicians describe such points as singularities. By 
the way, some equations blow up at finite values, such as x = 0, so in general it’s a 
good idea to go on a singularity hunt before you embark on the quest for a solution.) 

Weber’s equation simplifies considerably in the limit of large £. As £ —> ±oo, 
the second term in (9.61) grows, ultimately overwhelming the constant term e. Letting 
Xas(£) denote the limit of ^ e (£), 

MO -* Xas(C), (9.62) 

»±OC 

we can write the asymptotic form of Weber’s equation as 

(^2 -? 2 )x» s (0 = °. (9.63) 


24 Don’t confuse the energy variable with the binding energy of the finite square well, which in Chap. 8 
we denoted by e„. 

25 Students often ask why such functions are “special.” I know no better answer than that provided by 
W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T. Vetterling in their superb book Numerical Recipes: 
The Art of Scientific Computing (New York: Cambridge University Press., 1986): “There is nothing particularly 
special about a special function except that some person in authority or a textbook writer (not the same thing!) 
has decided to bestow the moniker.” The bible of special functions (for scientists and engineers) is the massive 
compendium Handbook of Mathematical Functions edited by M. Abramowitz and I. Stegun (National Bureau 
of Standards Applied Mathematics Series No. 55, November 1970). I find particularly useful Formulas and 
Theorems for the Special Functions of Mathematical Physics by W. Magnus, F. Oberhettinger, and R. P. Soni 
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 1966), which includes some little-known relationships involving these functions. 


386 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




Not surprisingly, x«s(0' s independent of the energy variable e, which disappeared from 
(9.61) in the limit. 

Equation (9.63) is almost the equation for a Gaussian function, 

0 = (« 2 ± 1) /(€)• (9.64a) 

Equation (9.64a) has two linearly independent solutions: the Gaussian functions e - * 2 / 2 
and e + * / 2 . But we are interested only in the solution to (9.63) for very large values of 
£. In the asymptotic region, £ 2 - 1 « £ 2 , and Eq. (9.64a) becomes identical to (9.63). 
So introducing arbitrary constants A and B, we can write the general solution of Weber s 
equation in the asymptotic region as 

Xas(0 = Ae ~^! 2 + Be + * 2 / 2 [solution for £ -4 ± 00 ]. ( 9.64b ) 

Question 9-12 

What is the width of e^ 2 ? 

Question 9-13 

Substitute the general form (9.64 b) into (9.63) and, using the fact that |£ 2 | is large, verify 
that it is indeed a solution. 


Do you see a problem with the asymptotic solution (9.64/;)? As £ —» 00 , one of the 
terms blows up: e + * f 2 — » oc. From our solutions of the TISE for a piecewise-constant 
potential in Chap. 8 we know how to deal with such exploding terms: we kill them off 
by exploiting the arbitrariness of the constants in the general form. In Eq. (9.64 b) we 
choose B — 0, thereby ensuring that the function (£) decays to zero as £ —> 00 and 
hence is normalizable. So we have discovered how the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of 
the simple harmonic oscillator behave in the asymptotic limit 


1 > e (0-♦ Xas(£) = Ae * 2/2 

£—♦±00 


(9.65) 


Aside: More on the Asymptotic Solution of Weber’s Equation. Strictly speaking, 
Eq. (9.65) describes the dominant behavior of ^e(x) in the asymptotic limit. Closer 
examination of Weber’s equation reveals that in this limit, it’s satisfied by any function 
of the form ^ 2 , where n is an integer. As f — > ± 00 , the decaying exponential 

dominates the growing power In fact, for any positive constant a, 

lim £"e~ a * =0. a > 0 

£-.30 


Thus we regain Eq. (9.65). 


What Happens Everywhere Else 


Let’s write in a way that incorporates what we know—its asymptotic behavior— 
and that represents what we don’t know by a new function H ( {£) and a constant A: 


MO = AH f (0e- e ' 2 


(9.66) 


Sec. 9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 387 





Eventually we’ll determine A via the normalization condition, which, expressed in tenns 
of the dimensionless variable £, reads 

^/ + °°#(OtM€)de = 1. (9.67) 

But t/> £ (£) can satisfy this condition only if i/ c (£) does not befoul the asymptotic decay 
to zero of the Gaussian factor in (9.66). Our eigenfunction will be normalizable if H e (£) 
has the property that 


H t (Oe~ e,<1 ->0. (9.68) 

*±oc 

We already know a few things about the unknown function in (9.66). First, notice 
that the eigenfunction t/> £ (£) depends on the energy variable e = 2E/(hwo), but the 
asymptotic function does not. So I’ve labelled H e (£), the unknown function in (9.66), 
with e. Evidently, this function will play a role in determining the bound-state energies. 

Second, the function H e (£) should reflect the properties of the corresponding eigen¬ 
function tp e (x). One of these properties is the definite parity of this eigenfunction. The 
Gaussian l ' 2 is even, so H t (Q must be responsible for the parity of ^(z); i-e.. 


V(x) is symmetric 


A(~0 = ±W£) 

He (-0 = ±ff e (0 


parity 

condition. 


(9.69) 


Aside: A Clue in the Asymptotic Solution of Weber’s Equation. I noted above 
that in the asymptotic limit Weber’s equation is satisfied by any function of the fonn 
A£"e _ * 2/2 , where n is an integer. This suggests a possible form for H f (£): a sum 
of powers of £, i.e., a polynomial, such as co£° + C 2 ? + + ... (even parity) or 

ci£' + C 3 ^ 3 + cs£ 5 + ... (odd parity). And indeed, this turns out to be the answer. 


The Differential Equation to Solve 

We began our assault on the TISE for the SHO by rewriting it in simplified notation 
and dimensionless variables (Table 9.3). Examination of the asymptotic behavior of the 
resulting equation revealed that its solution is dominated by a decaying Gaussian. We 
have factored this (known) function out of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction and must now 
derive an equation for the remaining, unknown function. To this end, let’s substitute the 
form (9.66) for ^ e (£) into Weber’s equation (9.61). After a little algebra, we obtain 


~ 2 ^ T /,(0 + (e - 1 ) ff <(0 = 0 


Hermite 

equation 


(9.70) 


This equation is called the Hermite differential equation, after the French mathematician 
Charles Hermite (1822-1901), who found and explored its solutions. These solutions are 
appropriately called Hermite functions. 

Question 9-14 

Derive Eq. (9.70). 


388 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




Our approach to the Hennite equation is quite simple (see Table 9.2). Most func¬ 
tions can be represented by a power series in their independent variable ( e.g ., the Taylor 
and Laurent series). So we’ll try expanding i/ e (£) in a series with unknown coefficients 
c j> 


H<(0 = c 0 + CtZ + ctf 2 + , (9.71a) 

oc 

= X>jC i - (9.716) 

j =o 

Of course, one or more of these coefficients may be zero. To determine their values, 
we will substitute this series into the differential equation for H e (£) and, exploiting the 
linear independence of the functions £>, will derive a relationship between various of 
the coefficients. This relationship is called a recursion relation. Last, we’ll impose the 
boundary conditions (9.68). Doing so will limit the series to a finite number of terms 
and, as it happens, will determine the allowed energies of the oscillator. 

Question 9-15 

Use the relationship between the Herniite functions H € {£) and the Hamiltonian eigenfunc¬ 
tions ip t (Q and your knowledge of the qualitative properties of these eigenfunctions to 
answer the following question: Which of the following describes the £ dependence of the 
lowest-order term in the power-series expansion of the Hennite polynomial in the ground- 
state eigenfunction : a constant tenn, a term proportional to £, or a term proportional to 
where n> 1? Next, answer this question for the first excited state. 


Power Series: A Quick Review 

Before we begin, I want to jog your memory regarding series expansions of functions. 26 
You are probably familiar with expansions of elementary functions in power series. For 
example, the expansions of and e - *, which solve the differential equations 

te ±1 ) /(4) = 0 ' 

are 

e** = l±* + ±«*±±«» + 

OC 

j =0 


(9.12a) 

(9.12b) 


where 


k = i- 


We can adapt this form to other functions, such as : 


(9.72c) 


20 If this summary isn’t sufficient, see Chap. 5 of Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 2nd ed. by 
G. Arfken (New York: Academic Press, 1970) or Mathematical Methods in the Physical Sciences, 2nd ed. by 
Mary Boas (New York: Wiley, 1963). 


Sec. 9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 389 



(9.73 a) 


e ^ = i+€ a +s(€ s ) 4 +a(«*) ,+ i( { *) 4+ - 

= l+C 2 + ^ 4 + ^ c + ^ 8 +••• . (9.736) 

To write a general form [analogous to (9.72/?)] for the series (9.73/;), we need only note 
that the powers in successive terms increase by 2; viz., 

oc 

= J2 b A J ’ (9-74o) 

i=0 

(oven) 


where 


bj 


1 

( 172 )!' 


(9.746) 


A crucial question concerning a series expansion of a function is: for what values 
of the independent variable does the series converge to the function? The region of £ 
within which a power series YJL o bj& converges to an analytic function /(£) depends 
on the behavior of the ratio of successive terms in the series as the summation index j 
becomes large. According to the d’Alembert ratio test, such a series converges for all 
£ if the ratio of successive terms, &j+i£ J+1 /b/£ J , goes to zero as j —> oo. For example, 
the ratio of successive terms in the series (9.73) is 



2 + 1 




0. 


(9.75) 


[Notice very carefully that Eq. (9.75) implies only that the series converges, not that it 
converges to zero.] Of course, this series does converge, to e* . 


Solving the Hermite Equation the Power-Series Way 


With this background, let’s return to the series (9.71) for the Hennite function. What 
are the implications of the properties of the Hermite functions, Eqs. (9.68)-(9.69), for 
this series expansion? First, H f (£) depends on the energy variable e, so at least one of 
the unknown coefficients cj must also depend on e; i.e., Cj = c,(e). Second, the parity 
condition (9.69) means that each function H e (£) will include either even powers of £ 
(if it is even) or odd powers (if it is odd)—but not both. This property follows from the 
simple parity of x". 


(-x)" = (-i JV = ±* M . 


n even 
n odd 


That is, each Hermite function must have one of the following forms: 

Co + c 2 £ 2 + c 4 £ 4 H- even parity 


IMO = 


Cl£ + C3^ 3 + + 


odd parity. 


(9.76) 


(9.77) 


390 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




One consequence of (9.77) is that for each Hermite function, one of the coefficients c 0 
and ci must be zero: 27 


H c (£) is even =s> c 0 ^ 0 and c x = 0 (9.78a) 

H f (0 is odd => c, ^ 0 and c 0 = 0. (9.78/;) 

This requirement poses no problem. The function H t (£) contains two arbitrary coef¬ 
ficients, so two of the cj's in (9.71) are arbitrary. One of these will appear in each 
even-parity function and one in each odd-parity function. 

At this point, I hope you are worried by the presence in the Hermite series of an 
infinite number of terms. The worry is that this series may blow up as £ -> oo. Such a 
detonation would not necessarily be a disaster, because it’s the function 


= Ae t 2/2 



(9.79) 


that must go to zero in the asymptotic limit. In fact, the blow up of these series is a 
disaster, for it dominates the decay of the Gaussian and renders the product of the two 
functions unnormalizable. Fortunately, we can avoid this disaster by making the series 
finite. This works because in the asymptotic limit, a decaying exponential dominates any 
finite polynomial. 28 So once we’ve derived the recurrence relation, we must find a way 
to terminate each series at a finite number of terms, so that it includes tenns with incides 
from j = 0 to j = j max . 


The Algebra 


To substitute the series (9.71) into the Hermite differential equation, we need a couple 
of derivatives: 

s 7=0 

* 7=0 

Substituting these expansions in the Hermite equation, we get 

PC oo oo 

]Tj(j - 1 )CjC~ 2 -2 Y.OCjC + 0- n^Tc^' = 0. (9.81) 

7=0 J=0 7=0 

To extract from (9.81) a relationship between the coefficients cj , we use the linear 
independence of the functions {1,£,£ 2 ,£ 3 ,...}. That is, the only linear combination of 
these functions that equals zero is the one with zero coefficients: 

27 Equaiions (9.78) apply to the solutions of the Hermite differential equation because, as we’ll see, 
in the even-parity solutions of this equation the lowesl-order term is constant and in the odd-parity solutions 
the lowest-ordcr term is proportional to £. In general, we can conclude only that for even-parity solutions 
C 2 ?i+i = 0 and for odd-parity solutions C 2 « = 0. 

28 Sec, for example, § 6.8 of Calculus and Analytic Geometry by G. B. Thomas (Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley, 1960). 


(9.80a) 

(9.80/;) 


Sec. 9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 391 




cq+ci£ + c 2 £ 2 H-= 0 <=> c 0 = ci = c 2 = • • • = 0 


(9.82) 

independence 


To exploit this property, let’s first manipulate Eq. (9.81) into the form 

oo 

(factors involving the cj s) = 0. (9.83) 

7=0 

Then (9.82) allows us to set each factor equal to zero. 

The only term in (9.81) not already in the desired form is the first. This term 
contains £ J-2 instead of But look at this series: 

oc 

£ j(j - l)cA J ~ 2 = 2C 2 + 3• 2c 3 £ + 4 • 3 c A ? + ■■■ . (9.84a) 

7=0 

To write (9.84 a) in the form (9.83), we need only reduce the value of the index j by 2; 
i.e. y 

f>'(j - = f>• + 2)0 + l)c J+2 « j . (9.846) 

7=0 7=0 

Question 9-16 

If you aren’t familiar with the re-labelling of summations, a standard gambit in the solution 
of differential equations, this step may seem a bit magical. The key is that the factors j 
and j - 1 in (9.84a) kill the terms for j = 0 and j = 1. [a]. Write out the first few tenns 
in (9.84/;) explicitly and verify that it is equivalent to (9.84a). [b]. More formally, you can 
get the same effect by changing the index of summation from j to j' = j - 2. If j runs 
from 2 to oo, then j 1 runs from 0 to oo. Try this procedure, then replace j' by j and regain 
(9.84/;). 


With this re-labelling, Eq. (9.81) assumes the form of (9.83): 


£ [(; + 2)0/ + l)c J+ 2 + (6 - 1 - 2j)cj]e = 0. (9.85) 

7=0 


According to (9.82), the quantity in square brackets is zero. Therefore, successive coef¬ 
ficients Cj +2 and Cj in the series for the Hermite function are related by the two-term 
recurrence relation 


Cj+2 _ 2 j + 1 — e 

Cj “ (7 + 2)0 + 1) • 


(j = 0,1,2,---] 


(9.86) 


Notice that the energy variable appears in this relation. 

“What good,” you may be wondering, “is a two-term recurrence relation?” Well, 
we can use this equation to determine the terms in the Hermite series from the arbitrary 
coefficients, c 0 and C\. Taking into account the parity of these functions [Eq. (9.69)], we 
can write 


m ) = 


Co 


Cl 


c» c 2 Co C.1 C-2 Co 


Cl C 3 Cl C 5 C 3 Cl 


even parity 
odd parity 


(9.87) 


392 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




Now, for the first coupled even parity solutions we have 



1 - € 


C2 = 

2 Co 


C4 = 

5 -< 

f 1 - 

12 2 \ 12 J 

V 2 


co- 


Similarly, for an odd-parity function i/ c (£), 


= 

C 5 = 


3 — e 
6 

7 — e 
20 


Cl 


c 2 




(9.88a) 


(9.88/;) 


So it looks like we’re through. We have enough arbitrary coefficients to normalize the 
eigenfunctions, and we have developed clean fonns for the Hermite functions of both 
parities: 



E c iC 

even parity 


H,(0 = - 

j =0 

(even) 


r - 2j + 1 ~ C c 

E cjC 

j=i 

t (odd) 

odd parity 

J+2 0 + 2)(j + l) J 


(9.89) 


But there is a snake in Eden. 


Aside: Convergence of the Hermite Series. Is the problem lack of convergence ? 
Does this series converge? Well, the ratio of successive terms is 

Cj +»( i+1 = 2j + 1 - e 2 

C& (j + 2)0 + 1 )* ' 

This ratio does go to zero as j —» 00 . So the series (9.89) do converge to an analytic 
function of £. The trouble is not whether this series converges, but what it converges 
to. 


Trouble at Infinity 


The form of the Hamiltonian eigenfunction (9.66) for the SHO is 


iPe(£) = (infinite series in £) (decaying Gaussian). (9.90) 


For this function to be physically admissible, it must go to zero as £ —> 00 . The easiest 
way to investigate the asymptotic behavior of a series is to relate it to an analytic function 
of £. Mathematicians know a clever way to ferret out such relationships: compare 
successive terms of the series in this limit to successive terms in the expansions of various 
analytic functions. Let’s apply this strategy to the even-parity Hermite series. (I’ll ask 
you to deal with the odd-parity solutions in a question.) 

For large |£|, the dominant terms in this series are those with large indices, j. In 
the limit j —> 00 , the ratio of successive terms in the Hermite series (9.89) behaves as 


c j+ 2 t i+2 = 2 j + l-e 2 ^ 2 2 

cj& ( j + 2)0' -1-1) j-°o j 


(9.91) 


Sec. 9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 393 




Now, 2£ 2 jj is precisely the ratio we found in Eq. (9.75) for the power-series expansion of 
the function /(£) = e* . Therefore, in the asymptotic limit the series for an even-parity 
Hennite function behaves like this function, i.e., 

oc 

V Cj£ j -* e^ 2 . (9.92) 

• U 

(even) 

We have a problem. Look at the asymptotic behavior of the product of this infinite series 
and the decaying Gaussian: 


[ Cj£ J I e ^ e ^ / 2 —> oo. (9.93) 

\U ) “I— 

Since this product is not bounded, it cannot be normalized and hence isn’t physically 
admissible. 29 

The Terminator 

There is only one way out: we must terminate the series before it can blow up. That 
is, we must somehow force all coefficients cj for j greater than some finite index j max 
to be zero. This stratagem works because according to the recursion relation in (9.89), 
Cj +2 oc Cj, which implies that 

if c j, nnx = 0. then c j = 0 for a11 3 > Jmax • (9.94) 

According to the recurrence relation (9.86), we can make Cj milx +2 equal to zero 
by choosing the energy variable e so that the numerator in this relation is zero. So the 
series is terminated at j max if 


e = 2j max + l. (9.95a) 

For any value of j, nax > 0, Eq. (9.95a) forces the Hennite series to be finite. The 
resulting function is called a Hermite polynomial: 

Jmax 

H<(() = Y. C JC e = 2 j.na* + 1- (9.95 b) 

j =0 

29 This argument is heuristic, not rigorous. It can, however, be put on a rigorous foundation using a 
theorem concerning power series that was proved by D. F. Lawden [see his book The Mathematical Principles 
of Quantum Mechanics (London: Methuen, 1967)]: consider two power series ^fjLo c i& anc * 
that, according to the d’Alembert ratio test, converge to functions /i(£) and /2(0« respectively. If there exists 
a value of the index j —call it jo —such that for j > jo the coefficients of both series are positive and are 
related by bj/bj-i > Cjfcj-\, then /2(0 is bounded above by /i(£). Applying this theorem to the series 

for and for the Hermite function, one can prove [Eqs. (9.74) and (9.85)] that the Hennite series is bounded 
by the exponential function, i.e.. 


lim H t ( 0<e* 2 . 

±oc 

Any such function dominates the Gaussian e ~^in the asymptotic limit, leading to an exponential explosion. 
[This connection was pointed out in M. Bowen and J. Coster, Amer. Jour. Phys. 48, 307 (1980).] 


394 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 


When we construct the Hamiltonian eigenfunction ^ f (£) = AH e (^)e ~^/ 2 with a 
Hermite polynomial, we obtain a function of the form 

i/> e (£) = (finite series in £) (decaying Gaussian). (9.96) 

Such a function does go to zero in the asymptotic limit. Whew! 

For example, the smallest value of j max is j Iliax = 0. According to (9.95a), this 
choice corresponds to e = 1. This value of e forces all coefficients other than c 0 to be 
zero, i.e., c 2 = c 4 = • • • = 0. The resulting Hermite polynomial has only one term, 
H t (€) = Co, and is even. Here are a few more examples: 


Jmax 

= 2 

=> c 4 =c fi = - 

• = 0 

=> H e (t) = Co + c 2 e 

3 max 

= 3 

=>c 5 =c 7 = - 

■ = 0 

=> #e(£) = Cif + C 3 £ j 

3 max 

= 6 

=> C 8 = Cio = • ■ 

• = 0 

=> # f (£) = Co + c 2 £ 2 + c 4 £ 4 + c 6 e 


The Allowed Energies 


It is customary to label Hermite polynomials with the index n = j max . So the three 
polynomials in Eq. (9.97) are tf 2 (£), #3(0’ a °d #o(0- The index n is the highest power 
of £ that appears in the polynomial H n ( £), and is called the degree of the polynomial. 
We also use n to label the energy variable e and write the restriction (9.95a) as 

e„ =2n+ 1. (9.98) 


But this variable is related to the stationary state energies by E n = hwoe n /2 
[see Table 9.3]. So the requirement that H n (£) must be a finite polynomial restricts the 
energies of the simple harmonic oscillator to 



71 = 0 , 1 , 2 ,... 


(9.99) 


For any value of E not of this form, the corresponding eigenfunction of the SHO Hamil¬ 
tonian contains an infinite polynomial and hence blows up at infinity—socially unac¬ 
ceptable behavior for a function that aspires to physical significance. Once again we 
have uncovered a subtle kinship between mathematics and physics, the latter limiting the 
solutions provided by the former: 


boundary conditions 


energy quantization 


Question 9-17 

Repeat the above argument for an odd-parity Hermite function, showing that this case leads 
to the same restriction on the series as we found for an even-parity function. 


Question 9-18 

Question 9-15 explains why the series Eq (9.71) is appropriate to the Hemiite equation. 
But in general, the lowest-order tenn in the solution of a differential equation could be 
proportional to £ to some power, say p. If we cannot deduce this power, we can let the 
mathematics determine it by writing the series as 


Sec. 9.7 The Quantum Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Solved! 395 






oc 

m=eJ2 c ^ J - 

j=0 

Substitute this form into the Hermite equation and show that p = 0 for the even-parity 
functions and p = 1 for the odd functions. 


9.8 THE SHO—THE ANSWERS 


The key result of § 9.7 was our discovery that only certain solutions of the Hermite 
equation yield physically admissible wave functions—namely, finite polynomials whose 
order n is related to the energy variable e by e = 2n + 1. These polynomials fall into 
two classes according to their parity: 


n 



H„(0 = J] cj? 

j=u 

(even) 

n 

[c 0 arbitrary] 

n = 0,2,4,... 

H,M) = C * J 

i=i 

(odd) 

[ci arbitrary] 

ti —— 1 j 3,5) • • • 


(9.100) 


For functions of either parity, the coefficients cj for j > 1 are determined from the 
recurrence relation (9.86), which we can write as 


Cj = ./. Cj— 2 2 < j < n — 2. (9.101) 

j(j - 1 ) 

With this relation, you can easily generate lots of Hermite polynomials, if necessary. 
(Other mathematical properties of the Hermite polynomials are explored in Pblm. 9.11.) 


Example 9.2. The First Four Hermite Polynomials 

The lowest-order Hermite polynomial is the even function /f 0 (O> which, as we saw in § 9.7, 
is simply i/ 0 (f) = Co. It is conventional to choose c 0 = 1 (which we are free to do, since 
this coefficient is arbitrary), giving 


Ho(0 = 1 . 


(9.102«) 


Not a major thrill. (The function (9.102a) is not, of course, the ground-state eigenfunction 
of the SHO; we’ll construct and normalize that function in Example 9.3.] 

The Hermite polynomial for n = 1 is odd and consists of the single term ci£. 
Following convention, we choose cj = 1, which gives 

/fi(0 = *- mom 


The next two polynomials are a bit more interesting. The Hermite polynomial for 
n = 2 includes two terms: c 0 + c 2 £ 2 . According to the recurrence relation, the coefficient 
c 2 is just -2, so 30 


30 More conventions: In tables of Hermite polynomials, the highest power of £ always appears first, 
with a plus sign (see Table 9.4). Thus, the tabulated polynomials differ by an overall factor of -l from those 
calculated via the recurrence relation. In fact, we are free to multiply the Hermite polynomials by any constant 
we like, for they solve a linear, homogeneous differential equation and hence are arbitrary to within an overall 
multiplicative constant. 


396 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




(9.102c) 


^(0 = 1-2C 2 . 

One more, then I’ll stop. The form of the Hermite polynomial for n = 3 is // 3 (f) = 
ci£ + C 3 $ 3 . According to the recurrence relation, C 3 = —2/3, so this polynomial is 

tf3(0 = c-|c 3 . (9.l02rf) 

Mercifully, tables of Hermite polynomials exist (see Table 9.4), so we usually don’t 
have to go through this tiresome process. Then again, you never know when you might 
be separated from your trusty tables and need a Hermite polynomial. Or you might 
need a special function that hasn’t been tabulated. So please learn the tiresome process 
anyway. 


TABLE 9.4 A SELECTION OF HERMITE POLYNOMIALS. 

tfo(0 = 1 
tfi(0 = 2C 

= A? - 2 
Hs(0 = - 12£ 

// 4 (0 = 16£‘‘ - 48£ 2 + 12 
Ha(Z) = 32£ 5 - 160£ 3 + 120£ 

Hote) = - 480£‘* + 720f - 120 

H 7 te) = 128£ 7 - 1344£ 5 + 3360£ 3 - 1680£ 

H 8 te) = 256£ 8 - 3584£ c + 13440£ 4 - 13440£ 2 + 1680 
Hote) = 512$ 9 - 9216£ 7 + 48384£ 5 - 80640£ 3 + 30240£ 


Question 9-19 

Use the recurrence relation to generate the Hermite polynomial of order 10, i.e., H 10 (f). 
(Don’t start from Hate); use Table 9.4.) 

The Normalized Hamiltonian Eigenfunctions of the SHO 
(At Last) 


The Hamiltonian eigenfunction if> n (x) of the SHO is a product of the Hermite polynomial 
H n (£) and a decaying Gaussian, i.e.. 



^ u (x) = A„Hn{px)e fj7j2/2 

P=J^ n = 0,1,2,... 

SHO eigenfunctions (9.103a) 





[Notice that I’ve used the definition of the dimensionless length variable f = fix to 
translate into a function of x.] The corresponding energies are 


E n = (n+ hu 0 . n = 0,l,2,... 


SHO allowed energies 


(9.103/;) 


Sec. 9.8 The SHO—The Answers 397 





The only parts of the eigenfunctions (9.103aJ that remain to he worked out are the 
normalization constants A n . 

Example 9.3. The First Normalized Eigenfunction. 

The ground-state eigenfunction is 

MO = A 0 e~ e/2 . (9.104a) 


We must choose Ao so that the normalization condition [Eq. (9.67)] is satisfied, i.e. t 

(9.104 h) 


-A 2 

P ° 


e~t dt = 1 . 


You’ll find this integral—along with several others—in Table 9.5. The normalization con¬ 
dition (9.104/;) is satisfied if we choose 




(9.104c) 

So the normalized ground-state wave function of the simple harmonic oscillator is 

ground-state eigenfunction (9.105) 


* 0 ( M ) = ^ e -^ 2 / 2 e -- ot /2 


TABLE 9.5 USEFUL INTEGRALS 
OF GAUSSIAN FUNCTIONS. 



Happily, we don’t have to explicitly normalize each eigenfunction. The required 
integrals are of a well-studied standard form. From tables of integrals involving Gaussian 
functions, one can show that the normalization constant for the n th stationary state is 31 


^\ ,/4 _ 

7T / \J2 n n\' 


(9.106) 


The corresponding wave function is 





J 

II 

(r\ 1 

//„(/3a;)e-/ iV /2 e —i(2"+‘W/2 

V 7T J y/2"n\ 


(9.107) 


31 See Appendix J. For more information, have a look at the Appendix to Elementary Quantum Me¬ 
chanics by D. S. Saxon (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1968). 


398 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension 11 




A handy list of the first several eigenfunctions of the SHO is provided in Table 9.6, 
and the first eight of these functions — and their probability densities — are graphed in 
Figs. 9.15 and 9.16. 


TABLE 9.6 THE HAMILTONIAN EIGENFUNCTIONS OF THE SHO. 


n 

E n 

1 p n (x) 

0 

^hojQ 


1 

f/iwo 

(£)‘ /4 

2 

f/iwo 

(£)' /4 vTK * 2 -^-^ /2 

3 



4 

§/iu>o 

(£) 1/4 yni ( 16 , 04*4 _ 48 /? 2 . t 2 + 12 ) e - 0 2 * 2 /2 

5 

O 

3 

(£) 1/1 ( 32 / 3 5 x s - 16 O 0 3 ® 3 + 120 / 3 . t ) e"'* 2 * 2 / 2 


Question 9-20 

Just for fun (?), nonnalize ipi(x) (using Table 9.5 to ease the pain of integration) and show 
that your answer agrees with Eq. (9.107). 


Question 9-21 

Find the form of the normalized SHO eigenfunctions for energies of llhoJo/2 and 23ftcvo/2. 


9.9 THE SHO—THE PHYSICS 

Thus far we have focused on mathematical properties of the eigenfunctions of the simple 
harmonic oscillator, supporting the qualitative arguments of § 9.1-9.3 with a quantitative 
solution in § 9.7. But our ultimate goal is physical insight. So in this section we’ll 
use the stationary-state probability densities, as calculated from these eigenfunctions, to 
investigate statistical properties of this system. 

Question 9-22 

But first, show that the classical turning points of the simple harmonic oscillator are given 
by 


x n 


= ± 


2 n -F 1 


(9.108) 


Sec. 9.9 The SHO—The Physics 399 




Probability amplitude Probability amplitude Probability amplitude Probability amplitude 










(a) (b) 

Figure 9.15 (a) Normalized Hamiltonian eigenfunctions and (b) the corresponding probability' 
densities for the first four stationary states of the simple harmonic oscillator: n = 0, I, 2, and 3. 
Note that these eigenfunctions are plotted as a function of the dimensionless variable £ = 0x (see 
Table 9.3). [Adapted from Quantum Mechanics by K. Ziock (New York: Wiley. 1969).] 

400 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 










Probabilistic Properties of the SHO 


The probability density P„(x) tells us what to expect in a position measurement on an 
ensemble of SHOs in the n th stationary state. The results predicted by these functions 
differ strikingly from those for a classical oscillator—as you can see by comparing ■PciM 
in Fig. 9.11 to the corresponding P n (x) in Figs. 9.16. 

The most obvious difference between these figures is that the classical oscillator 
cannot penetrate into a forbidden region. But no matter what its state, a quantum oscil¬ 
lator does penetrate into the classically forbidden regions. This penetration is greatest 
(i.e., the characteristic length is largest) for low-energy states (i.e., smallest n ) and, as 
you can see in Fig. 9.16, it diminishes with increasing energy. Because of this decrease 
in the characteristic length as n —> oo, the microscopic oscillator does behave in this 
limit somewhat like its classical counterpart. 

You have probably already spotted several other differences between the quan¬ 
tum and classical probability densities. Compare, for example, these two functions (in 
Figs 9.11 and 9.15) for an energy E = 3hu>o/2. (This is the first excited state of 
the microscopic oscillator.) If the physics of a particle with this energy were governed 
by classical physics, the particle would be most likely found near its classical turning 
points—precisely where, according to quantum physics, it is least likely to be found. 
Another striking difference is the nodes in the quantum-mechanical density functions, 
features that are absent from the classical densities. 

But look carefully what happens to these nodes (and to the associated peaks in P n ) 
as the energy E n of the microscopic oscillator increases: they appear to bunch together. 
Consequently the overall shape of P n (x) for a large value ofn begins to look suspiciously 
like P c i(x). This phenomenon—an important clue to the connection between classical 
and quantum physics—is more evident in the quantum-mechanical density for a very 
large value of the energy, such as Pgq{x) in Fig. 9.17. 

This observation strongly intimates that the classical limit of a simple harmonic 
oscillator is the limit of large energy (large n). And, as you’ll see when you answer the 
next two Questions, it is. But be careful in taking this limit. The energy levels of the 
SHO E n = (n+ \)hw o are equally spaced , so in the limit n —> oo, these energies do 
not merge to form a continuum. Instead, the separation between adjacent eigenvalues 
of the SHO, E n+ i — E n , is constant (Huj 0 ), and energy quantization—certainly a non- 
classical phenomenon—is preserved even as n —> oo. To see how to take the classical 
limit, consider the next two questions. 

Question 9-23 

Show mathematically why the classical limit of the SHO is n —» oo via the following 
argument: Divide the CA region [—x„,x„] into a finite number m of equally-spaced in¬ 
tervals of size Ax. Let x„, denote the midpoint of the m th interval. Evaluate the average 
over one such interval of the quantum probability density P„ (x) and show that this average 
approaches P c \(x) as n —> oo. In particular, show that 

x m +±Ax 

Pn (s) dx > Pc\ (x,n). 

n—* oc 

£ m -^Ax 



402 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




Figure 9.17 The posilion probability density for a simple harmonic oscillator in the stationary state 
0 g»(x). Also shown is the classical probability density for this energy. [Adapted from Quantum 
Mechanics by K. Ziock (New York: Wiley, 1969).] 


Question 9-24 

The correspondence principle (c./., § 4.2 and 5.7) relates classical and quantum mechanics 
by requiring the latter to reduce to the former in the classical limit. In many cases, we 
obtain the classical limit of a quantum-mechanical result by the artifice of setting h —> 0. 
But this gambit won’t work for the SHO energy spectrum of Fig. 9.18, because the energies 
of the simple harmonic oscillator are proportional to h. But the ratio of the spacing between 
adjacent levels to the energy of one of these levels behaves as follows in the limit of large 
energy: 

E „+1 - E„ = _L_ > 1 

E„ n + ^ n—o o n 

Explain why this is the appropriate way to take the classical limit of an energy spectrum. 
(Hint: What do spectroscopists measure?) 

Sec. 9.9 The SHO—The Physics 403 







E 


E 


Ea - — 

E, -- 

E 7 - 

- 

0 

Well 

(a) 



(b) 


Figure 9.18 Energy level diagrams for a 
simple harmonic oscillator (right spectrum) 
and a finite square well (left spectrum). 
The natural frequency of the oscillator and 
the width Vo and depth L of the well were 
chosen so that the two systems have equal 
ground-slate energies and the square well 
supports several bound states. 


Statistical Properties of the SHO 


The results of ensemble measurements of observables such as position, momentum, and 
energy are described by statistical quantities—expectation values and uncertainties—that 
we can calculate from the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian. If the state is stationary, 
the particle’s energy is sharp, and the statistical quantities for this observable are simply 

(E) = E n AE = 0 [n th stationary state]. (9.109) 

Only a bit more work is required to evaluate the expectation values and uncertainties for 
the other two key observables: position and momentum. 

The position probability densities in Fig. 9.16 show vividly that the position of a 
particle in the n th stationary state of a SHO is uncertain: 

0 < Ax < oo [n th stationary state]. (9.11077) 

This means that the linear momentum is also uncertain, because the position and mo¬ 
mentum uncertainties must satisfy the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, Ax Ap > h/2: 

0 < Ap < oc [n th stationary state]. (9.110Z?) 

Thus does nature limit our knowledge of the position and momentum of a particle in a 
stationary state. 32 

The implications of Eq. (9.110) for experimental physics are clear: in an ensemble 
measurement of either position or momentum, individual results will fluctuate about the 
mean, (x) tl or (p) n . We can calculate these expectation values for the n th stationary 
state from the definitions 


32 Thcre do exist states of the simple harmonic oscillator for which the position or the momentum are 
sharp at certain times. But these states are not stationary. It is also possible to construct state functions (by 
superposing stationary-state wave functions) whose expectation values (x) and (p) mimic those of a classical 
oscillator. These states, called “coherent quasi-classical states”, are also non-stationary. Coherent states play 
an important role in the quantum theory of electromagnetic radiation and in quantum optics. See, for example, 
Complement Gy in Quantum Mechanics, Volume I by C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, and F. Laloe (New York: 
Wiley, 1977). 


404 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



(9.11k/) 


/ oo 

1 p* l {x)xip n (x)dx 

■oo 

(p)„ = ~ ih j dx. (9.1 1 1 b) 

Or we can think for a moment and determine these average values without doing any 
work. The property of the eigenfunctions that renders trivial the determination of these 
expectation values is (you guessed it) parity. 

Look: the parity of x is odd, so regardless of the parity of ipnix), the integrand in 
(9.111/7) is odd. Hence the integral is zero, and (x) n = 0. Well, that was easy enough. 

Evaluating (9.111/;) isn’t much harder—if you remember that the first derivative 
of a function With even parity is an odd function, and vice versa: 


— (even function) = odd function 
dx 

d 

— (odd function) = even function 
dx 


(9.112) 


Regardless of the parity of ipn(x), this eigenfunction times its first derivative is odd. 
Hence the integrand in (9.11 lb) is odd, the integral is zero, and ( p) n = 0. 

But wait a minute: in no way did these proofs depend on the particular symmetric 
potential under consideration. That is, we used only the parity of the Hamiltonian 
eigenfunctions, not the fact that they are eigenfunctions of the SHO. So, almost without 
intending to, we’ve proven that 


(x) n =0 (p) n = 0 n th stationary state of a symmetric V(x) 


(9.113) 


Knowing the expectation values of position and momentum makes evaluating their 
uncertainties easier. In this case, the expressions we must evaluate are [c./., Eq. (7.63)] 

(Ax)„ = \J(x 2 ) n - (xf n = fx 2 ) n (9.114a) 

(A?)„ = \Ap 2 )„ - (p)l = \J(P 2 )„- (9.1 14ft) 

So the expectation values we must evaluate are 


{x 2 ) n = / ip*(x)x 2 ip n {x) dx 
J — OO 

/ oo .2 

'tl>n{x)-^'tl ) n (x)dx. 


(9.115/7) 

(9.115/;) 


General forms for the remaining integrals have been derived from the properties of the 
Hennite polynomials in the spatial functions (see Pblm. 9.11)—the answers appear in 
Table 9.7. 


WARNING 

The results in Table 9.7 pertain only to the simple hannonic oscillator; unlike Eq. (9.113), 
these integrals are not general properties of a stationary state. 


Sec. 9.9 The SHO—The Physics 405 






TABLE 9.7 HANDY INTEGRALS OF EIGENFUNCTIONS 
OF THE SIMPLE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR. 



Question 9-25 

Evaluate the matrix elements {tpo \ p | V'i) and i | p \ ipo) by direct integration and verify 
that the first two expressions in Table 9.7 are, for these cases at least, correct. 

Question 9-26 

Evaluate the matrix element of p 2 between two eigenfunctions of the simple harmonic 
oscillator. 


Example 9.4. The Position Uncertainty 

To evaluate (Ax)„ we need only look in Table 9.7 for the expectation value of x 2 , viz., 


(* 2 ) 


271 T 1 
2(3 2 



h 

muJo 


E n 


(9.116) 


where I’ve used the definition of and E„ = (n + hu>o to express (x 2 ) in a variety 
of handy forms. The position uncertainty is just the square root of this expectation value, 



[n th stationary state] 


(9.117) 


This result expresses quantitatively a trend we saw in Fig. 9.16: the position uncertainty 
increases with increasing energy (i.e., with increasing n). 

The quantity we just evaluated is a measure of the range of values of x where a 
microscopic particle with a SHO potential is likely to be found in an ensemble measurement 
of position. The classical counterpart of this quantity is defined by the classical turning 
points, Eq. (9.108). These points define the range of values -x„ < x < x„ where a 
macroscopic oscillator with energy E„ would be found. The position uncertainty is related 
to x„ by 


(Ax)h — ^_Xii, 


(9.118) 


406 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





so for this system, the position uncertainty turns out to be comparable to the classical range, 
i.e.. 


(Ax),i fa x n . 


(9.119) 


Question 9-27 

Show that the average value of the potential energy of the SHO in the n lh stationary state 
is 

<^( ;E )>„ = (z 2 ) fl > (9.120a) 

= \E n . (9.120 b) 

We’ll return momentarily to the implications of this result. 


Example 9.5. The Momentum Uncertainty 

At first glance, the prospect of evaluating the momentum uncertainty (9.1 14Z?) looks hor¬ 
rendous. In the position representation, p 2 = -h 2 d 2 fdx 2 , so the integrand in (9.115/;) is 
a product of (rc) and its second derivative, which, in turn, is the product of a Hermite 
polynomial and a decaying Gaussian. No doubt the resulting integral is one you and I don’t 
want to evaluate unless we absolutely have to. 

We don’t have to. We can get rid of the second derivative of V'n(z) by taking 
advantage of its appearance in the TISE, 

-ti 2 -^ij) n (x) = 2 m[E n - V(x)]ip n (x). (9.121) 

Substituting this form into (9.115/?), we obtain a much simpler expression for the expectation 
value, 


(p 2 ) n = I ipn{x)(2m[E» -V{x)]\'ip n {x)dx ) (9.122a) 

J — OO 

/ oo 

/ ip* l (x)'ijj n (x)dx - 2m{V(x)) n . (9.122/?) 

•oc 

Now look carefully at the two terms in (9.122/?). The Hamiltonian eigenfunctions are 
normalized, so the integral in the first tenn is unity. This reduces the expectation value to 


(p 2 ) n = 2m [£ n - (V(x)) tl . [n th stationary state of any potential V(a;)] 


(9.123) 


Notice that in this derivation, V(x) is arbitrary; nowhere did we use an explicit form of the 
simple harmonic oscillator potential or of its eigenfunctions, nor did we assume that these 
functions have definite parity. So Eq. (9.123) pertains to any bound stationary state of any 
one-dimensional potential. 

We apply Eq. (9.123) to the SHO by inserting the form of the potential, viz.. 


{p 2 ) n = 2m [#„ - imu?S (a; 2 ) n 


= 2m 
= mE„. 


m 1 _ 2 En 

En — -mu?o „ 2 


mu>n 


(9.124a) 

(9.124 b) 
(9.124c) 


Sec. 9.9 The SHO—The Physics 407 




This simple result gives the equally simple momentum uncertainty. 


(A p) n = \/mE„ = J(n h |) hmv 0 

_ v [n th stationary state of the SHO]. (9.125) 

= hfi\Jn+ \ 

The position and momentum uncertainties for several stationary states of the simple 
harmonic oscillator are tabulated in Table. 9.8, from which you can get an idea of their 
trends as n increases. For future reference, I’ve collected together the statistical properties 
of the SHO in Table 9.9. 


TABLE 9.8 POSITION AND MOMENTUM 
UNCERTAINTIES FOR THE SIMPLE 
HARMONIC OSCILLATOR. 


n 

0( A*)„ 

(Ap) n /y/mhu> 0 

0 

0.71 

0.71 

1 

1.22 

1.22 

2 

1.58 

1.58 

3 

1.87 

1.87 

4 

2.12 

2.12 


TABLE 9.9 PROPERTIES OF THE n th STATIONARY STATE 
OF THE SHO. 


Observable 

Q 

Certainty? 

(Q) 

(A Q) n 

Energy 

n 

sharp 

E n 

0 

Position 

X 

not sharp 

0 

\ ( n + 2 ) 
y v ^ mm 

Momentum 

p 

not sharp 

0 

\/( n+ 2 ) h 


Question 9-28 

Evaluate the expectation value of the kinetic energy T for the n th stationary state of the 
SHO, using Eq. (9.125). Show that your result can be written 

(T) n = \E n - (9.126) 

Aside: The Virial Theorem in Quantum Physics. A most interesting feature of a 
macroscopic simple harmonic oscillator is the equal sharing of its total energy among 
kinetic and potential parts. Expressed mathematically, this result—called the Virial 
Theorem—reads 

E = 2T = 2V [for a macroscopic SHO]. (9.127tf) 

408 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





A similar relationship holds for a microscopic oscillator in a stationary state, 
as you discovered if you answered Questions 9-27 and 9-28. But the form of this 
relation reflects a fundamental difference between classical and quantum physics, for 
the quantum-mechanical Virial Theorem is expressed in terms of expectation values 
and pertains only to stationary-states of the oscillator. This theorem states that on the 
average , the total energy in a stationary state is equally partitioned among potential 
and kinetic parts, i.e., 


<£>„ = 2<T)„ = 2(V>„. (9.1276) 

Of course, the expectation value in (9.127/;) is just ( E) n = E„ 33 

Question 9-29 

Prove the following general relationship between the mean kinetic and potential energies of 
any stationary state, 

[T +V(x)]Mx) = E n f„(x), 

=> (T > + (V) = E. 

Now prove that the Virial Theorem (9.127/;) is consistent with this relationship. 


The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle for the SHO 

Using our expressions for the position and momentum uncertainties for the n th stationary 
state of a simple harmonic oscillator, we can calculate the uncertainty product in the 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle—according to which these uncertainties for any state — 
stationary or non-stationary—of any microscopic system, are related by (Ax)(Ap) > 
h/2. But the result, as calculated from the general forms in Table 9.9, is somewhat 
surprising: 

(Arc),, (A p) n = ^ h. (9.128) 

The uncertainty product satisfies the uncertainty principle in a special way: for the ground 
state (n = 0) it is equal to /i/2. 34 

Question 9-30 

From the data in Table 9.8, calculate the uncertainty products for the first five stationary 
states of the SHO. 


Question 9-31 

What are the limiting values of (Ax)„ and (Ap)„ as n —* oo? Is your answer consistent 
with the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle? 


33 For more on the Virial Theorem, see Chap. 14 of Quantum Chemistry 3rd ed. by I. N. Levine 
(Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1983). 

34 This result may remind you of § 4.5, where we showed that a Gaussian function is the wave packet 
of minimum uncertainty [see Eq. (4.69)]. But there is a crucial difference. In Chap. 4 we were discussing 
non-stationary states of a free particle ; in this chapter the same mathematical function has appeared as (he 
ground-state eigenfunction ipo(x) of a particle bound in a simple harmonic oscillator potential. There is nothing 
mysterious going on here; the feature that renders the uncertainty product for this function a minimum is not 
the physical significance of this function, but its mathematical form. 


Sec. 9.9 The SHO—The Physics 409 



'9.10 THE INCREDIBLE SLOSHING OSCILLATOR 


Stationary states are important but dull. Properties such as P„(x) ( E) n , and (Ax) ;i are 
independent of time; so not even in a statistical sense does the “motion” of a microscopic 
oscillator in a stationary state resemble that of a macroscopic oscillator. 

But the behavior of a microscopic oscillator in a non-stationary state is far more 
interesting. To investigate the motion of a particle in such a state we must calculate 
the expectation values of position and momentum—which, because the state is non- 
stationary, turn out to depend on time. 35 

Example 9.6. A Periodic Wave Packet. 

Suppose the state of a system is represented by the normalized wave function 

V{x\t) = -J= e - 0 2 * 2/ 2 [ e -'"ot /2 + yfipxe -* 1 ” 0t/2 ] . ( 9 . 129 * 7 ) 

Pretty scary, right? 

Not actually. The presence of the Gaussian e~ (} x /2 and factors of the form 
e -»uwot/2 are clues that this function may be a simple combination of stationary-state 
wave functions (x,i) = il> n {x)e ~ xEnt ^ h . Sure enough, a few moments spent with the 
analytic forms in Table 9.6 will reveal that 

*(x,t) = ± |»o(s,t) + »i(*,t)]. (9.129 b) 

To be sure, this function does not represent a stationary state, for its dependence on space 
and time variables can’t be separated. 

Question 9-32 

Verify that Eqs. (9.129*7) and (9.129/?) are equivalent. 


Evaluating statistical properties of the state is much easier if we work with the ex¬ 
pression for ty(x,i) in terms of stationary-state wave functions, (9.129/?), because we know 
these properties for stationary states (Table 9.9). For this reason. I’ll also leave the forms 
of all equations as general as possible for as long into the derivation as possible. 

The expectation value of position at time t is 

/ OO 

'&*{x,t)x'l!(x,t)dx. (9.130) 

*OC 


Inserting (9.129 b) but not explicit forms for the eigenfunctions into this definition, we obtain 


<*) (0= !(<^o 1*1 ^°> + 0>i I ® I 

+ <*)|*| ih)e~ iwot + {* | x | fh)e +iuot y 


(9.131*7) 


The first two terms in (9.131*7) are just (x) 0 and (x) r and, according to Table 9.9, these are 
zero. In the remaining terms are two matrix elements that, according to Table 9.7, are both 
equal to l/y/20 2 . So the expectation value of position for the non-stationary state (9.129) 
is simply 

<I>(<) = = ^ COSWo< - < 9l3 'w 


35 We’ll take up non-stationary states in their own right a few chapters from now (Chap. 12), so you 
can skip this extended example if you have to. 


410 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



Now let’s evaluate (p) ( t ) for this state, 

(P) (0 = \ [ (P )o + (?) i “ ^ ^ tfo (®) jr'0i (®) 


—» u» 0 < 


(9.132a) 


— ih^J tl)l(x)—ipo{x)dxj e +,u '°* 

Calling once again on Table 9.7, we can reduce the right-hand side of (9.132 a) to 
<P> W = = -^=sin wot. 


(9.132/;) 


So, written in tenns of ft = yjmwo/h, the mean values of the position and momentum 
of a simple harmonic oscillator in the non-stationary state (9.129) are 


(, x) (t) = \ —— — cos wot (9.1 33a) 

y 2m U){y 

(p) (t) = <*><>£• (9.133/;) 

Well, this state is certainly non-stationary! In contrast to the stationary states in previous 
sections, this state is characterized by a position and momentum that, on the average, oscillate 
about zero with period 27r/ ojo, just like the classical trajectory x(t) and p(t) of a macroscopic 
oscillator. 

But don’t be fooled: this finding doesn’t pertain to all observables—as you’ll discover 
in the next Question. 


Question 9-33 

Use the TISE = E„ip u (x) to show that the mean value of the energy for 

the state (9.130) is 

(E) = (*(*,() I H I #(*,«)) = \(E a + E,) = ft Wo. (9.134) 

Hint: You will need to use the following property of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions, 
which we’ll prove in the next chapter: 



i/>!i(x)i/> m (x)dx = 0 


m^n. 


(9.135) 


In the non-stationary state of this example, the uncertainties in position and momentum 
oscillate with the classical period To (see Pblm. 9.4). This is strange behavior for a wave 
packet—most of these critters spread; their widths increase without limit as time passes [see 
§ 6.7 and especially Fig. 6.4]. But the motion of this packet looks something like this: 
according to Eq. (9.133a), it “sloshes” back and forth between the classical turning points 
(/>., its center undergoes simple harmonic motion at frequency wo). After one period, the 
packet has resumed its original shape! No spreading. 

To gain further insight into this strange behavior, consider the probability density for 
this state: 


P(x,t) = '&*(x,t)'If(x,t) 

= \ bPo(x)ipn{x) + t/q (x)^i(x) 

+'i/jo(x)'ipi(x)e~' UJ(lt + ^(xhMx')e +,u, °'] . 


(9.136a) 

(9.136/;) 


Sec. 9.10 The Incredible Sloshing Oscillator 411 



The time-dependent terms in P(a,’,f) oscillate at the natural frequency u 0 . So at the end 
of a period the probability density returns to the form it had at the beginning of the period. 
No spreading! 

A General Non-stationary State of the SHO 

We can easily generalize the arguments at the end of Example 9.6 to show that sloshing 
characterizes the motion of any wave packet of a simple harmonic oscillator. This gen¬ 
eralization is based on the expansion of the wave function for an arbitrary non-stationary 
state in Hamiltonian eigenfunctions. Any such function can be written (see Chap. 12) as 
a sum of stationary-state wave functions, with expansion coefficients I’ll call d n \ i.e ., 

OO 

*0M) = J2 d n^n(x)e- iE " t,h . (9.137) 

»=0 

It is imperative that the sum include all eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian. The coeffi¬ 
cients d n depend on the initial condition 0). 

To see the sloshing of such a state, let’s calculate the corresponding probability 
density: 

OO oc 

P(x,t) = (9.138) 

;»=0 H = 0 

Look at the time dependence of this function. Each term oscillates at frequency cj 0 or 
at an integral multiple of this frequency. So the probability density for an arbitrary state 
of the SHO is periodic: after a time 27r/ wo, P(x , t) returns to its original form. Every 
non-stationary state of the SHO is therefore periodic. 


WARNING 

This time dependence is peculiar to states of the simple harmonic oscillator; sloshing be¬ 
havior with no long-term change in the width occurs for no other system. 


Aside: Sloshing of a Coherent State. A particularly interesting periodic wave 
packet that is widely used in applied fields such as quantum electronics and quantum 
optics is one that represents a “coherent state” of the SHO. This state evolves from 
the initial condition 


¥(*, 0 ) 


' e -P 2 (*-T0) 2 /2 


(9.139) 


This function has the form of the simple Gaussian that describes the ground stationary 
suite of the simple harmonic oscillator— c.f. Example 9.3 [Eq. (9.104a)]—but differs 
from V'o(x) in that its center (x) (0) is displaced by an amount xo. 

The probability density for (9.139)—which we can obtain by expanding this 
function a la Eq. (9.137) and evaluating the coefficients d „—is unexpectedly simple 36 


P(x } t) 



(9.140) 


36 See § 2.8 of Quantum Mechanics: Principles and Applications by M. Alonso and H. Valk (Reading, 
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1972). 


412 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




The center of this function, which is also a Gaussian, changes with time according 
to the familiar formula (x) ( t) = xocos toot . Evaluating the uncertainty Ax(£), we 
discover that the width of this particular wave packet is independent of time\ As 
illustrated in Fig. 9.19, this packet sloshes back and forth with a constant width. This 
state is unique: no other in nature exhibits this behavior. 



Figure 9.19 The evolution of a coherent state of a simple harmonic oscillator. The 
probability density (9.140) is shown as a function of time, with the motion of a classical 
particle indicated by the solid dots. Notice that the width of the wave packet is unchanged 
as it executes periodic motion under the influence of the restoring force of the harmonic 
potential. [From The Picture Book of Quantum Mechanics by S. Brandt and H. D. 
Dahrnen (New York, John Wiley, 1985). Used with permission.] 


Before leaving this section, I want to reiterate the approach we used to the derivation 
of the expectation values { x ) ( t ) and ( p ) ( t ) in Example 9.6. Learn from this example! 
Fight the temptation—rife among novice quantum mechanics—to develop an explicit 
form for a state function before you carry out the required algebraic manipulations! 
You might get the right answer this way, but suffer far more pain than necessary. So 
remember 


Rule 

When manipulating the wave function for a non-stationary state, always work with its 
general form as long as possible. Avoid until the last minute inserting into this form 
explicit dependence of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions (or of operators) that appear in this 
form. 


*9.11 FINAL THOUGHTS—AND AN APPLICATION OF THE 
LINEAR POTENTIAL 

In § 9.5 I mentioned several applications of the simple harmonic oscillator. But this 
is just one of many continuous one-dimensional potentials used in current research to 
model complicated interactions. The Schrodinger equations for most such potentials can 


Sec. 9.11 Final Thoughts—and an Application of the Linear Potential 413 






r 


be transformed into differential equations that are solved by special functions or that can 
be subdued by the method of power series—although particularly recalcitrant cases must 
be attacked via numerical integration (c./., the Selected Readings for Chap. 8 ). To close 
our study of continuous potentials (and, for the moment, of problem-solving tactics), let’s 
take a brief look at another important continuous example, the linear potential V'(rc) cx x. 

I want to introduce this model in the context of a remarkable application from solid 
state physics. If an ordinary metal is exposed to a magnetic field of a few hundred Gauss 
directed parallel to its surface, as in Fig. 9.20a, the resulting potential energy supports 
bound states of the electrons in the metal near the surface . 37 The potential such an 
electron finds itself in can be accurately approximated by a linear form. 

We’ll denote the distance into the metal by x and the magnetic induction of the 
applied field by B. The surface presents an infinite barrier to the electron (like the left 
wall of the infinite square well in Chap. 7), so our model is actually a half-infinite linear 
potential. For a magnetic field of strength B, the potential inside the metal is proportional 
to B and to a constant 7 that depends on the particular solid under investigation, i.e ., 38 

f 7 Bx x > 0 

V(£) = < half-infinite linear potential. (9.141) 

( 00 x < 0 

This potential, which is sketched in Fig. 9.20b, supports an infinite number of bound 
stationary states , the first four of which are shown. It can be used to model the potentials 
experienced by an electron in many metals in their normal phases. For example, at 
temperatures greater than 1.2 K, the electrons in metallic aluminum find themselves in 
a potential very like Eq. (9.141). (But at lower temperatures, this metal becomes a 
superconductor, and the model potential in Fig. 9.20c becomes more appropriate.) 

Aside: Magnetospectroscopy. In the laboratory, solid-state physicists probe the 
mysteries of surface electron states by a technique called resonant magnetospec- 
troscopy. The idea is simpler than the name: Microwave radiation of frequency u m 
is applied to the solid (in addition to the magnetic field B = Be y ). This radiation 
induces transitions between bound states in the potential (9.141), provided that the 
applied frequency is nearly equal to the separation between the levels. In practice, the 
applied frequency cu„, is fixed and the field strength B varied, changing the energy 
levels until their separation is close enough to hw m for a transition to be likely—a 
condition called resonance. 

The TISE for the linear potential (9.141) is 

~2mda?+ iBx — E = 0. [for x > 0 only] (9.142) 

The solutions of this equation that obey the boundary conditions imposed by the potential 
(9.141) are the bound-state eigenfunctions and energies, which I’ll label by an index 

37 These states are sometimes called “skipping states,” because in such a state, a classical particle, acting 
under the influence of the magnetic force, would skip along the surface of the metal—like a flat rock on a still 
pond. Technically, these states are known as "surface Landau levels.” For more about these fascinating states 
and their physics see R. E. Doezema and J. F. Koch, Phys. Coiut. Matter, 19, 17 (1975) and M. Wanner, R. 
E. Doezema, and U. Strom, Phys. Rev. B. 12, 2883 (1975). 

38 In SI units, the magnetic field strength (in non-magnetic materials) is related to the magnetic induction 
by H = //o B, where /<o is the constant 47r x 10“ 7 H/m. The magnitude of the corresponding (Lorentz) force 
on a particle of charge q and velocity u is F = qvB. From this force we obtain the potential (9.141). 


414 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





lb) 


Ionization 

limit 



Figure 9.20 (a) The half-infinite linear model of the potential of an electron near the 
surface of a normal metal. The potential energy (b) supports an infinite number of 
bound states, four of which are shown along with the classical turning points of the 
first two, xi and X 2 . For a superconductor, such as Al at temperatures below 1.2 K, 
the model potential (c) is used. This potential supports a finite number of bound states 
whose energies lie below the limit indicated by the horizontal dashed line. Note that 
the continuum state with energy £3 can tunnel through the barrier (see Chap. 8 ). [For 
a discussion of this potential, see R. E. Doezema, S. C. Whitmore, and J. N. Huffaker, 
Phys. Rev. B. 34, 4614 (1986).] 


n = 1, 2, 3, ... . The boundary conditions reflect the effect of the infinite barrier at the 
surface of the metal: 


ij) E (x = 0) = 0 (9.143a) 

$ E {x )->0. (9.143 b) 

x —*+00 


Sec. 9.11 Final Thoughts—and an Application of the Linear Potential 415 









Before launching into the mathematical solution of Eq. (9.142), let’s apply our knowledge 
of qualitative quantum physics to sketch a couple of the bound-state eigenfunctions. It 
turns out that we can deduce quite a lot about these functions without much labor: 

1. Since the potential is not symmetric, its eigenfunctions don’t have definite parity. 

2. This potential depends on x , so the classical turning points depend on the energy. 
The classical turning point x n for the n th stationary state is (see Fig. 9.20b) 

x„ = % n=l,2,... (9.144) 

7 B 

These points are critical: they delimit the classically allowed and classically for¬ 
bidden regions and thus are instrumental in our determination of the nature of the 
eigenfunctions, as 

CA region 0 < x < x n : 4 !>„(re) oscillatory 
CF region x n < x < oo: 4>n (x) monotonically decaying 

3. The amplitude of each eigenfunction changes with x : as x increases from 0, 
the quantity \E n - V(x)\ decreases, so the amplitude of 4>n{x) increases [see 
Eq. (9.21)]. 

4. The wavelengths and decay constants of two spatial functions, say 4 J i{x) an d 
4j 2 (x), reflect the x dependence of the potential. The wavelength for 4> 2 {x) is 
smaller than that for 4>\{x), as * s the ,oca * decay constant. Therefore, 4>2{x) 
oscillates more rapidly for x < x n and decays to zero more slowly for x > x n 
(i.e. t is more penetrating) than does 4>i(x)- 

5. The function 4>n{x) has n — 1 nodes. 

Putting these facts together, we can draw the qualitatively correct eigenfunction sketches 
in Fig. 9.21. 




Figure 9.21 Sketches of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions for the first two bound sta¬ 
tionary states of the half-infinite linear potential (9.141). The vertical dashed lines are 
the classical turning points x n that separate the CA and CF regions. 

Question 9-34 

Extend these arguments and sketch 4${x) and 4>*{ x )- 


Question 9-35 

Compare qualitatively the energy of the ground state of the linear potential in Fig. 9.20b 
with that of an infinite square well of width L — x 1 : is the energy of the linear potential 
greater than, less than, or equal to that of the infinite well? Also answer this question for 
the first excited state, using an infinite well of width L = X 2 . 


416 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



I Will Fear No Airy Functions 


But enough of such frivolity. How do we solve the TISE (9.142)? We could do so 
numerically 39 or we could transform it into a form that has already been solved by 
someone else. I prefer the latter approach. 

The necessary transformation involves introducing a potential strength parameter, 
an energy variable, and a dimensionless length—just the sorts of tricks we played on the 
TISE for the simple harmonic oscillator in § 9.7 (see Table 9.2). First we must isolate 
the second derivative in the first term of (9.142); viz.. 


d 2 2 ra 2 mE 


i) E {x) = 0 . 


(9.145) 


To clean up (9.145), let’s introduce the following intermediate quantities (c./., Table 9.3): 


_ 2m _ 

,- 2m F 

f £ 


potential strength parameter 
energy variable. 


(9.146a) 

(9.1466) 


In this garb, the TISE looks like 

(Sa? ” + 6 ) = °* (9.147) 

According to our game plan (c./.. Table 9.3), the next step is to introduce a di¬ 
mensionless variable £. Following the example of the simple harmonic oscillator, you 
might try £ = fix. Reasonable this choice is; successful it is not. After trying several 
reformulations of Eq. (9.147), one discovers that to reduce it to a form whose solution 
is known, we must change the independent variable from x to the enetgy-dependent 
variable 

€so (*-}J) where ° a (nsr) (9,148) 

With this definition Eq. (9.147) becomes the light and frothy 



-«)&«) = o- 


Airy equation 


(9.149) 


This equation is called the Airy equation, after the man who solved it. 40 

We want only solutions of (9.149) that satisfy the boundary conditions (9.143). So 
we must express these conditions in terms of £. Applying the change of variable x —♦ £, 
we find that the condition (9.143a) must be imposed on 1> e (Q at £ = -aE/^B). The 


39 See R. D. Desko and D. J. Bord, Amer. Jour. Phys., 51, 82 (1983). 

40 Their discoverer was the English astronomer and mathematician G. B. Airy (1801-1892). Airy is 
better known for his work as the Astronomer Royal, as the organizer of several completely unsuccessful 
expeditions to study the transit of Venus in 1874 and 1882, and as an egotistical, ruthless, and much disliked 
astronomer. He did not, of course, introduce Airy functions in the context of quantum physics, which did not 
exist when he published their details (1838). Rather, he was studying rainbows. See H. M. Nussenzwetg, Set. 
Amer., 236, 116 (1977). 


Sec. 9.11 Final Thoughts—and an Application of the Linear Potential 417 



second condition is a limit, so it does not change when the variable does. We obtain the 
boundary conditions : 41 

i> e = =° (9.150a) 

MO - > 0 . (9.150ft) 

+OC 

The two linearly-independent solutions of Eq. (9.149) are called the Airy functions. 
They are denoted by the odd notation Ai(£) and Bi(£). (The symbol i is not it is 
part of the name of the function.) Graphs of selected Airy functions appear in Fig. 9.22. 
Each Airy function oscillates, crossing the horizontal axis at several (discrete) values of 
the argument £. These special values of £, which occur only for negative values of £, 
are called the zeroes of the Airy function. I’ll denote the zeroes of Ai(£) by £„ for 
n = l, 2, .... 



Figure 9.22 The Airy functions Ai(£) and Bi(£). [Adapted from Figs. 10.6 and 10.7 
of Handbook of Mathematical Functions, ed. by M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun (New 
York: Dover, 1965).] 

Using the two Airy functions, we can construct the general solution of the TISE 
for a linear potential. With arbitrary coefficients C and D, we have 

i> e {0 = C kx{i) + DBx{i). (9.151a) 

The trouble with this form is that Bi(£) blows up as £ —> oo, which eruption violates 
the boundary condition (9.150/;). So we must set D = 0, leaving behind the physically 
admissible eigenfunction 

MO = CAi(0- (9.151ft) 


41 The half-infinite linear potential (9.141) admits a non-zero Hamiltonian eigenfunction only for a: > 0. 
But the transformation to the variable £ is such that £ = 0 at the classical turning point x„ = E n /(^B). So 
the CA region includes negative values of this region is —aE/^B) < £ < 0. 


418 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 


We can determine the coefficient C by enforcing the normalization condition, which for 
this eigenfunction reads 


J ip* E {x)'ip E (x)dx = 1 => i = !■ (9.152) 

-nE/( 7 jO) 

As usual, I’ll bypass this tedious normalization. 

We took care of the boundary condition at infinity, (9.150/?), by setting D = 0 in 
the general form (9.151a). But physically admissible eigenfunctions must also satisfy 
the condition at the left wall of the potential, Eq. (9.150a). As you might expect, this 
condition quantizes the bound-state energies. Watch. 

The only way the function (9.151/?) can obey the boundary condition (9.150a) is if 

Ai (« = -^ B ) = °- < 9 - l53 > 


That is, the Airy function in the eigenfunction must have a zero at £ = — ae/^B). But 
we can’t control where the zeroes of Ai(£) occur (see Fig. 9.22); the only way we can 
enforce this requirement is to choose the energy in £ so that Eq. (9.153) is satisfied. This 
tactic becomes clear if we write explicitly the relationship between the nodes of the Airy 
function at £i, £ 2 > • • and the stationary-state energies E n , 


F 

■&n — 

a 




allowed energies of the linear potential. (9.154) 


The zeroes in Table 9.10 should help you determine the bound-state energies for any 
system that can be modeled by a half-infinite linear potential. You’ll have a chance to 
try this out in the impending problems. 


TABLE 9.10 THE FIRST 
TEN ZEROES OF THE 
AIRY FUNCTION Ai(£). 


n 

6. 

1 

-2.33810 

2 

-4.08794 

3 

-5.52055 

4 

-6.78670 

5 

-7.94413 

6 

—8.U2265 

7 

-10.04017 

8 

-11.00852 

9 

-11.93601 

10 

-12.82877 


Sec. 9.11 Final Thoughts—and an Application of the Linear Potential 419 



Example 9.7. Aluminum. 

A piece of metallic A1 (at a temperature above 1.2 K) is exposed to a magnetic field B — 
38.7 x 10 -4 Tesla. The velocity of an electron near the surface of the metal is 1.28 x 
10 6 m/sec. For this system, the constant in the definition of the potential is 7 = 2.05 x 
10 -13 C-m/sec . 42 The constant a in the definition (9.148) is a = 5.85 x 10 7 . 

We calculate the energies of the bound stationary states from the zeroes in Table 9.10 
according to 

E n = -1.36 x 10" 23 £„ (J) = -8.43 x 10 " 5 £„ (eV). (9.155) 

The ground state is very near the bottom of the well, with E\ = 1.97 x 10 -4 eV. The 
corresponding eigenfunction ipi(x) looks like the one in Fig. 9.21a; its classical turning 
point xi = - ( Ei/'yB ) = 4 x 10 ” 8 m. 


Question 9-36 

Suppose we are studying a system which is more accurately modeled by a half-infinite linear 
potential whose value at x = 0 is negative, i.e.. 


V(x) = 


-Vo+~fBx x > 0 
00 x < 0 


(9.156) 


where Vo > 0. How do the stationary state energies E n and eigenfunctions ip„ (x) of this 
system differ from those of Eq. (9.141)? 


The half-infinite linear potential (9.141) is a useful beast. It can be used to model a 
“quantum bouncer” (a point mass in a uniform gravitational field that bounces elastically 
on a horizontal floor). 43 And, more recently, it has played a role in the theory of 
elementary particles. Quarks are currently thought to be the fundamental building blocks 
of protons, neutrons, ..., indeed, of matter itself. Theoretical physicists have speculated 
that the interaction between two quarks may be a constant force, for the strong binding 
provided by such a force would explain the curious fact that isolated quarks have never 
been seen. And a constant force means a linear potential. 44 

So don’t let anyone tell you that continuous one-dimensional potentials are useful 
only to students of undergraduate quantum physics. 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


In order to attain the impossible 
one must attempt the absurd. 

—Miguel de Unamuno y Jugo 


42 The constant 7 actually depends on the orientation of the metal and of the field. This is a representative 
value. For more data on this experiment, see T. Wegehaupt and R. E. Doezema, Phys. Rev. D., 16, 2515 (1977). 

43 See P. W. Langhoff, Amer. Jour. Phys., 39, 954 (1971); R. L. Gibbs, Amer. Jour. Phys., 43, 25 
(1975), and V. C. Aguilera-Navarro, H. Iwamoto, E. Ley-Koo, and A. H. Zimennan, Amer. Jour. Phys., 49, 
648 (1981). 

44 You can find a discussion of linear potentials in quark theory in § 7.4 of Quantum Physics by R. 
G. Winter (Belmont, Ca.: Wadsworth, 1979). See also Y. Nambu, Sci. Amer., 235, 48 (1976) and S. D. 
Drell, Amer. Jour. Phys., 46, 597 (1978). More recent investigations suggest that the nuclear force is not 
constant, but rather varies with the distance between quarks, growing stronger at large distances, weaker at 
short distances. For more information, see the article “Asymptotic Freedom” by David J. Gross in Physics 
Today, 87, 39 (1987). 


420 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



Exercises 


9.1 Qualitative Behavior of Eigenfunctions 

In this problem, we consider the solution of the TISE for a couple of variations on the infinite 
square well of Chap. 7. In each part, you’ll be asked to determine how the eigenfunctions 
and bound-state energies change as a consequence of small changes in this potential energy, 
[a] Consider a particle of mass m with potential energy (see Fig. 9.1.1): 


V(x) 


oo — oo < x < 0 
0 0<x< L/2 

Vo L/2 < x < L 
oo L < x < oo 


(9.1.1) 


where Vo is a constant 0 < Vo < ^ 2 h 2 /2mL 2 . 

(1) For the potential in Fig. 9.1.1, is the energy E\ greater than or less than the ground- 
state energy for the corresponding potential with Vo = 0? Explain your answer. 

(2) Sketch the ground-state (n = 1) eigenfunction for this potential. On the same 
figure, sketch the n = 1 eigenfunction for the case Vo = 0. Discuss the differences 
between the two functions. 


V[x)i 



Figure 9.1.1 

[b] Now consider the potential energy (Fig. 9.1.2) 

V(x) = 

where Vo > n 2 h 2 /2mL 2 . Notice that the width of the well is now 2L. 


oo 

-oo < x < 0 

0 

0 < x < L 

Vo 

L < x < 2L 

oo 

2L < x < oc 



(9.1.2) 


x Figure 9.1.2 


(1) Sketch ipi(x) y the ground-state eigenfunction for this potential. On the same figure, 
sketch tpi(x) for the case V 0 = oo (/>., for a particle of mass m in an infinite well 
of width L) and for the case Vo = 0. Discuss the differences between the three 
eigenfunctions and the reasons for these differences. 


Exercises and Problems 421 



(2) Using arguments based on your sketches, determine upper and lower bounds on the 
ground-state energy for this potential. 

[c] Finally, consider the potential energy (Fig. 9.1.3) 


( CO 

x < 0 


K(x’) = \ ax 

0 < x < L 

(9.1.3) 

loo 

x > L 



where a > 0 is a constant. Consider the stationary state with n = 4. 


0 L * Figure 9.1.3 

(1) Sketch ip 4 (x) for this potential and for V = 0. Compare your two eigenfunctions 
and explain the differences between them. 

(2) Is the energy E 4 for Vo = V ( aL) greater than or less than the corresponding energy 
E 4 for Vo = 0? Why? 

9.2 Application of Quantum Mechanics to a “Molecular” Potential 

In § 9.6, we learned that vibrations of the nuclei in a diatomic molecule can be described 
by a one-dimensional potential V(R), where R is the intemuclear separation. Two typical 
molecular potentials are graphed as a function of R in Fig. 9.2.1. Assume that both potentials 
in this figure behave the same at the two extremes of R: i.e., that V(R) —* oo as R —* 0 and 
V(R) -» 0 as R — oo. 


L 

^ D v. 


1 

A 

* n ^ 

—n 


V{R) it 




\!"' /C"" 

R 

-V 0 - 

\ 1 / y, (R) 

Figure 9.2.1 A model of molecular 
vibrations. 


[a] Consider first the potential energy V\(R) in the figure. This potential has a minimum 
at R = R r . Near the minimum, i.e., for values of R such that |7? - R r .\ < a for some 



422 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





constant a, the potential energy has positive curvature d 2 V(R)/dR 2 = mul, and can 
be approximated by the parabolic function 


V X {R) = ±mu)l{R - R c ) 2 . (9.2.1) 

But for | R- R t . | > a, the potential Vi (i?) deviates from this simple form (see Fig. 9.2.1). 

(1) Write down approximate expressions for the eigenfunction ip 0 (R) and energy E 0 of 
the minimum energy stationary state. Why are your results only approximate? What 
is the approximate expectation value (R) for this state? 

Hint : Be careful to note where the origin of R and the zero of energy are defined. 

( 2 ) Let’s define the value of the potential Vi at R = R e ±a to be -V„, i.e., Vi(fl e ±a) = 
-V a . Suppose the curvature of the potential energy at its minimum R = R e is given 
by 


2 d 2 V(R) 


(V. - v„f 

— m- - tt-!— 

3 6h 2 


(9.2.3) 


Consider bound states with energy E < -V„. Derive an expression for the ap¬ 
proximate energies of these bound states. Discuss the qualitative nature of the 
corresponding bound-state eigenfunctions. 

[b] Now briefly consider the “dissociating” potential energy V 2 (R). 

(1) What are the allowed energies for this case? 

(2) For what values of E (if any) are the eigenfunctions normalizable? 

(3) Suppose we pick an energy E and define R E as the corresponding classical turning 
point. Discuss the behavior of the eigenfunction 'J'e(x) in the regions 0 < R < R E 
and R > R E . 

9.3 Molecular Vibrations: An Application of the SHO 

The Hamiltonian that represents small-amplitude vibrations of a diatomic molecule is Eq. (9.55) 
with m replaced by p, the reduced mass of the molecule. Suppose we use the SHO to model 
vibrations of the CO molecule. Spectroscopic measurements reveal that one of the stationary 
states of this molecule has an energy E u = 0.6725 eV. The corresponding spatial function 
ipn(x) is sketched in Fig. 9.3.1. 



Figure 9.3.1 A stationary-state wave 
function of the CO molecule. 


[a] What is the quantum number n for this state? 

[b] Sketch the probability density for this state. (Don’t cheat; stay away from Fig. 9.15). 

[c] Suppose we perfonn an ensemble measurement of the internuclear separation R of CO 
in this stationary state. 

(1) What average value of R would be obtained in the experiment? 

(2) What is (are) the most probable value(s) of R for this state? You need not calculate 
these quantities! You can estimate them from the sketch of or from your sketch 
in [b]. But be sure to explain how you arrived at your answer. 


Exercises and Problems 423 


[d] Suppose the CO molecule undergoes a transition from the n‘ h stationary state to the 
(n - l) th state. What is the value of the frequency v of the photon emitted in this 
transition? 

9.4 A “Truncated” Simple Harmonic Oscillator Potential 

Consider an electron near the surface of a solid. The surface presents an infinite potential 
barrier to the electron. Suppose the forces inside the metal are most accurately modeled by 
the SHO potential energy so that the potrential of the electron is 


V(x) = 


oo x < 0 

\m<jjQX 2 x > 0 


(9.4.1) 


[a] What are the energies of the three lowest stationary states of this system? Explain how 
you arrived at your answer. 

[b] Do the eigenfunctions of this system have definite parity? Why or why not? 

[c] Sketch the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions for the ground state and the first excited state of 
this system. 

9.5 Bound Stationary States: Short-Answer Questions 
Consider the potential shown in Fig. 9.5.1, 

{ V\ -oo < x < —a 

c|x| -a<x<b (9.5.1) 

V 2 b < x < 00 

where V\ > V 2 > 0 and c is a positive, real constant. Also shown on the figure is the energy 
E 1 of the ground stationary bound state of this potential. 



(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

Figure 9.5.1 

For this energy, we can identify five regions of x, 

Region 1 -00 <x < -a 

Region 2 — a <x < — x (2) (£^i) 

Region 3 -x i2) (E\) <x < x^(Ei) (9.5.2) 

Region 4 x^(Ei) <x < b 

Region 5 b <x < 00 . 

Consider each of the following statements about the function i(x). If the statement is 
correct, simply say so and go on. If, however, the statement is in any way incorrect , explain 

424 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 





what is wrong with the statement. If part of an incorrect statement is correct, be sure to note 

that, too. 

1. The spatial function ipi{x) in Region (5) is a decaying, exponential-type function. 

2. The spatial function ipi(x) in Region (2) has the following x dependence: e + ' , r , where 
k is a positive, real constant. 

3. in Region (3), ipi{x) is a linear combination of the oscillatory functions sin kx and 
cos kx, where k is a positive, real constant. 

4. The spatial function ip i (re) has definite parity, and, since it is the ground state spatial 
function, it is even. 

5. The function ip\{x) has one node, but this node does not occur at x = 0. 

6 . The function ipi{x) penetrates deeper into the classically forbidden Region (5) than into 
Region (1). 

Remark: Another way to express [ 6 ] is to say that the integrated position probability for 

Region (5), 

P (5) = f \ip,(x)\ 2 dx , (9.5.3) 

Jb 

is larger than the integrated position probability for Region (1), 

P m = j |lMs)| 2 dx. (9.5.4) 

J - oc 


Problems 

9.1 Comparison of a Piecewise-Constant and a Continuous Potential 

We spent most of Part III working with the symmetric finite square well [of height Vo and 
width L (with its midpoint at x = 0)] and the simple harmonic oscillator [of natural frequency 
tuo]. Consider the ground-state eigenfunctions of these two potentials: ipf w (x) and ^o HO (x). 
Choose the parameters of the well (K 0 and L) and of the SHO (w 0 ) so that the following 
criteria are satisfied: 

1. The classical turning points occur at the same values of x. 

2. The local wave number at t = 0 of the piece of ipu HO (x) in the CA region is equal to 
the wave number of the corresponding piece of ipf w (x). 

3. The local decay constant of the pieces of ipo llo (x) in the CF regions are equal at the 
classical turning points to the decay constant of the corresponding pieces of ipi W (x). 

Now, for the resulting parameters, prepare an accurate graph of the ground-state eigenfunc¬ 
tions. Discuss the physical and mathematical origin and the significance of all differences 
between the two functions. 

9.2 Selected Continuous Potentials 

For each of the following systems, derive an expression for the bound-state energies in terms 
of fundamental constants and the zeroes of the appropriate special functions: 

1. A particle of mass m bouncing elastically from a fixed floor in a gravitational field with 
constant acceleration g. 

2. A proton moving in a uniform electric field. 

9.3 Vibrations of the OH Molecule 

Vibrations of the nuclei in the ground electronic state of an OH molecule can be modeled by 
a SHO potential with a vibrational frequency that corresponds to hvuo = 9.68 x 10 _ 2 eV. 
Suppose, instead, that we try to model this system by a finite symmetric square well of width 
L and depth Vo. Determine values of these parameters so that the following conditions are 
fulfilled: 

1. The ground-state energies of these systems (Eq for the SHO and E\ for the well) are 
equal. 

2. The well supports five bound states. 


Exercises and Problems 425 



Draw adjacent energy-level diagrams (on the same scale) for the two systems, showing 
the lowest five states of each. Graph the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of these five states 
for each system. Which model is more realistic, and why? 

9.4 A Non-Stationary state of the SHO 

A one-dimensional microscopic simple harmonic oscillator is in a quantum state represented 
by the state function 

\ • (9.4.1) 


[a] Evaluate the position and momentum uncertainties A x(t) and Ap(f) for this state 
and show that these functions oscillate at the natural frequency of the simple harmonic 
oscillator, wo. 

[b] Graph the position probability density for this state at the following times (where T 0 is 
the classical period): t = \Tq, \To, |To, To, §To, and 2To. 

9.5 A General Non-Stationary State of the SHO 

A wave function of a simple harmonic oscillator can be expanded in a linear combination of 
the stationary-state wave functions we have studied in this chapter, as 


OC 

^{x,t) = y^ j d n il>n(x)e~ tEnl/tl 

n=0 


= Y <i„ An Hn (0x) e-' ,V2/2 e~ iE " ' 1/6 . 

»t=0 


(9.5.1) 


The expansion coefficients d„ are calculated from the initial wave function ^(s,0) as 

d H = An e-‘ 32x2/ *H n (PxMx y 0)dx. (9.5.2) 

J — oo 

In this problem we’ll apply this expansion to a system in which the particle is initially localized 
at the position xq. So the initial wave function is the Dirac Delta function (see Chap. 4) 


tf(z,0) = 8(x - ®o). 


(9.5.3) 


[a] Derive an expression for d n for this state. 

[b] Write down the first three terms in the expansion Eq. (9.5.1) of 

[c] Sketch the function in the sum Eq. (9.5.1) at t = 0, including first one, then two, then 
three terms. Now consider the number of terms in the series: would you need a few 
terms or a large number of terms to accurately represent the initial state Eq. (9.5.3)? 

9.6 Semiconductor Quantum Physics 

A very thin sample of the semiconductor PbTe (lead telluride) of width L is exposed to a 
uniform electric field £ normal to the surface. The potential energy of an electron near the 
surface of the sample can be modeled by the one-dimensional potential 

{ oo — oo < x < 0 

ax 0 < x < L . (9.6.1) 

oo L < x < oo 

(This potential is just an infinite square well with a ramp for a floor.) We can control the 
width of the sample L in the process of growing it. 

[a] Write down the general solution of the TISE for this system, introducing two arbitrary 
constants C and D. 

[b] Now impose the boundary conditions appropriate to this potential and thereby transform 
the TISE into a set of two linear homogeneous algebraic equations for C and D. Under 


426 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



what conditions does this set of equations have a non-trivial solution (/>., one other than 
C = D = 0)? Use your answer to derive an equation for the bound-state energies of 
the particle. 

[c] Suppose we grow the crystal so that its thickness is equal to the difference between the 
two zeroes £1 and £ 6 of the Airy function Ai(£)- Solve your equation from [b] for the 
bound-state energies of this potential. 

9.7 Airy and Bessel Functions 

[a] Show that the spatial functions resulting from the condition (9.153) can be expressed in 
tenns of Bessel functions of order 1/3, as 


MO = 


Ci Kj (f« 3/2 ) 


£>0 

£<0 


where I<i is a modified Hankel function (a Bessel function of the third kind), 

[b] Show that the bound-state energies are the values E„ at which 



+ J_ i 

3 


? nr\ 

3y 1 Bh 2 ) 


= 0 . 


9.8 A Light and Airy Problem 

The Airy function Ai(£) is actually an integral. It’s defined as 


Ai(0 = - lim 

7T f —0 



du. 


(9.8.1) 


(The factor e eu guarantees that the integral will converge as u -> oo. This factor vanishes 

when we take the limit, after integration.) 

[a] Prove that the integral in Eq. (9.8.1) satisfies the Airy equation (9.149). 

[b] By examining the behavior of the integrand in Eq. (9.8.1) for large Values of the variable 
£, explain why Ai(£) goes to zero in the limit £ —> oo. This limit, you will (I hope) 
recall, is vital to ensuring that an eigenfunction involving an Airy function satisfies the 
boundary conditions for physical admissibility. 

[c] Show that the asymptotic limit of the Airy function is 

Ai«)-. * (9.8.2) 

(—oc y/2 7T 

[d] Using Eq. (9.8.2), compare the behavior in the classically forbidden regions of the 
ground-state eigenfunctions of the half-infinite linear potential and of a simple harmonic 
oscillator. In particular, decide if the eigenfunction for the ground state of the linear 
potential decays to zero with increasing £ faster, slower, or at the same rate as the 
ground-state eigenfunction of the SHO. Also compare the rate of decay of the ground- 
state eigenfunction of the linear potential to that of the corresponding function for a 
finite, symmetric square well. 

[e] The other asymptotic limit is £ -> -oo. In this limit, the Airy function reduces to the 
fonn 


Ai(0 — 
£-•-00 



(9.8.3) 


Use this form to determine approximate zeroes of the Airy function for n = 3, 4, 
and 5. Compare your answers to the exact zeroes in Table 9.10. 


Exercises and Problems 427 



9.9 Bending Vibrations of Methylene 

The SHO is a useful model for studying the vibrations of a diatomic molecule (see § 9.6). 
But more complicated systems call for more complicated models. Consider, for example, the 
methylene molecule CH 2 . In its ground electronic state, this system is bent; the angle between 
the two C-H bonds is about 134°. The vibrations of this molecule are bending vibrations and 
are described as functions of this angle, which we’ll denote by 0. (Other kinds of vibrations 
involving stretching of the C-H bonds also occur. In this problem, however, we’ll keep these 
bonds fixed at their equilibrium values.) 

A graph of this potential, shown in Fig. 9.9.1, 45 looks like a parabola with a hump in 
the middle. Also shown on this figure—and tabulated in Table 9.9.1—are the first seven 
stationary-state energies, as determined by recent, highly accurate, spectroscopic studies. 4(i 



To study these vibrations quantum-mechanically, we must devise a model of this potential. 
We’ll express this model in terms of the variable x = 6 - 0 C , i.e., the displacement of the 
bending angle from equilibrium. Obviously, the simple SHO potential V{x) = %x 2 

won’t do. 

[a] Suppose we induce a hump in the SHO potential by adding a Gaussian term that includes 
two additional parameters, a and /?, i.e., consider 

V(x) = ^rau> lx 2 +ae~ l1r . (9.9.1) 

(1) Determine values of the parameters wo, a, and (3 in Eq. (9.9.1) that fit the data in 
Table 9.9.1 


45 Adapted from R. B. Bunker and P. Jensen, J. Chem. Phys., 79, 1334 (1983). 

4(i See D. G. Leopold, K. K. Murray, A. E. Stevens-Miller, and W. C. Lineberger, J. Chem. Phys., 83, 
4849 (1985). 

428 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



TABLE 9.9.1 

ENERGIES OF STATIONARY 
(BENDING) VIBRATIONAL 
STATES OF METHYLENE. 


n 

E„ (eV) 

1 

0.12 

2 

0.23 

3 

0.35 

4 

0.50 

5 

0.66 

6 

0.84 

7 

1.04 


(2) Repeat (1) using a model that contains, in addition to the terms in Eq. (9.9.1), the 
quartic term 7 a; 4 . Which model do you think is the most accurate? 

(3) Using the methods of § 9.2-9.3, sketch the first four eigenfunctions ip n {x) of your 
best model potential. On these sketches, also show the corresponding eigenfunctions 
for the case a = 0 . 

[bj Suppose we try the alternate model 

K(a-) = 7 s 4 - qx 2 , (9.9.2) 

treating 7 and uo as parameters. 

(1) Graph this equation for several choices of 7 and w 0 to convince yourself that it is 
possible to find parameters that give a shape similar to that in Fig. 9.9.1. 

(2) Analysis of spectroscopic data for methylene reveals that the minima in the potential 
of the ground electronic state occur at 9 C = 134° and at = 314° and that the top 
of the bump is roughly 0.2 eV above these minima. From these data, determine 
the values of the parameters 7 and u»o in the model potential Eq. (9.9.2). 

(3) What are the energies of the first seven bound states of a SHO with a natural 
frequency cjq equal to the value of this parameter you determined in (2)? Compare 
your answers to those in Table 9.9.1. 

[c] “Double-hump” potentials can be used in a variety of molecular problems, such as 
the buckling motion of ring compounds in organic chemistry, and the inversion of the 
ammonia molecule in laser physics. In some of these applications, the minima are much 
deeper (compared to the hump) than in methylene. If this is the case—and if we’re 
interested only in low-lying vibrational states—we may be able to get a (very) rough 
approximation to the energy levels by assuming the hump to be very large. Consider this 
limit and expand the model potential Eq. (9.9.2) in a Taylor series about equilibrium, 
dropping all terms above the quadratic. Derive an expression for the energy levels for 
the left and right wells in this model. 

9.10 A Qualitative Solution of a TISE 

Consider a particle of mass m with potential 

V(x) = c\x\, (9.10.1) 

where c is a real, positive constant (see Fig. 9.10.1). We’ll denote the ground stationary state 
of this system by the quantum number n = 1 . 


Exercises and Problems 429 




x Figure 9.10.1 



[a] Sketch ^i(x) and ^io(s). In your sketches, be careful to show accurately the changes 
in wavelength and amplitude as x varies. Briefly discuss the qualitative features of these 
two states, explaining them on physical grounds. 

[b] Sketch the probability densities for these two stationary states. On your sketch of P\o(x), 
also show the probability density that classical physics would predict for a particle with 
this potential energy. 

Remark: This problem is yet another example of the Correspondence Principle —quantum 
behavior becoming classical behavior in the appropriate limit. 

9.11 Hermite Polynomials: A Capsule Introduction to Their Properties 

In our study of the simple harmonic oscillator, we encountered our first (but not last) special 
function: the Hermite polynomials of degree n, H n (£). From now on—in this course and in 
other physics, math and engineering courses—you’ll be using special functions, many of which 
are more complicated than Hermite polynomials. The care and feeding of these functions is 
facilitated by the fact that they all share similar properties and satisfy similar relationships. In 
this problem, we’ll develop the most important of these properties and relationships for the 
Hermite polynomials. 

The Hermite polynomial of order n is defined as 

H„(() = (-l)"e f2 ^ e -« 2 . (9.11.1) 

The origin of this polynomial is, surprisingly, buried in an interesting property of Gaussians. 
Recall (from Chap. 4) that, in its simplest form, a Gaussian function has the mathematical 
form 

id) = (9.11.2) 

The properly to which I’m referring concerns the n th derivative of /(£). This derivative is 
proportional to a polynomial of degree n, to wit: 

-4-/(0 = (-1)” (ft 11 ' order polynomial) /(£). (9.11.3) 

[a] Verify Eq. (9.11.3) for n = 0, 1, and 2. Show that polynomials in this equation for 
these values of n are indeed the Hermite polynomials of degree 0, 1, and 2. Using 
Eq. (9.11.1), derive // 3 (0- 

As the last question in part [a] shows, the definition Eq. (9.11.1) is not a particularly 
convenient way to determine Hermite polynomials. One alternative is to use a recurrence 
relation. A recurrence relation is an equation that relates the desired special function of order 
n to functions of lower order and, sometimes, to their derivatives. 

[b] From the definition Eq. (9.11.1), derive the recurrence relation 

H„(0 = (9.11.4) 

430 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



One of the most important relatives of a special function is its “generating function.” 
The generating function generates the desired special function via a Taylor series expansion. 
For example, a Taylor Series expansion of 

9 (A) = <T a2+2as (9.11.5) 


in the variable A about A = 0 “generates” the Hermite polynomials according to the following 
equation: 

9(A) = #,.«)■ (9.11.6) 

»=0 


[c] Derive Eq. (9.11.6). 

Hint: One way to do this is to first consider the Taylor series expansion about A = 0 of 
the function 

/(£ + A) = e _u+A)2 . (9.11.7) 


Then use Eq. (9.11.1). 

You may well be wondering what earthly good Eq. (9.11.6) is. Surely it isn’t likely to help 
us derive explicit expressions for Hermite polynomials. True enough. But this equation can 
be used to easily obtain some very useful recurrence relations. 

[d] Use Eq. (9.11.6) to derive the following results: 

-£#„(£)= 2ntf„_,(0 (9.11.8) 

H „(0 = 2- 2(n - 1 )tf„_ 2 (0. (9.H.9) 


Hint: Differentiate Eq. (9.11.6) with respect to A and £. Then equate like powers of A. 

[e] Use Eq. (9.11.9) to derive Hq from H& and H 7 . 

[f] Use Eq. (9.11.8) to derive the differential equation satisfied by H ,,(£), 


\d 2 

de 


-2S± + 2n 


Hn(0 = 0 . 


(9.11.10) 


[g] Prove that the parity of H„(£) is (-1)”. 

9.12 Another “Truncated” SHO 

An unrealistic feature of the SHO potential is that it increases without limit to infinity. To 
improve on this model, we might try truncating this potential as shown in Fig. 9.12.1, i.e., 
with V\ and Vfc as positive constants. 


V(x) = 


V\ -oo < x < -a 
^mojQX 2 —a<x<b 

V 2 b < x < 00 


(9.12.1) 


Rather than solve the TISE for this potential (no trivial matter!) let’s explore some of 
qualitative features of eigenfunctions. 



Figure 9.12.1 


Exercises and Problems 431 



[a] Consider four ranges of energy: 


Range 

A : 

E>V 1 

Range 

B : 

V 2 < E < Vi 

Range 

C : 

0 < E < V 2 

Range 

D : 

E < 0 


For each range of energy, answer the following questions: 

(1) What is the nature of the eigenfunction (i.e., oscillatory or monotonic) throughout 
space (-00 < x < 00 )? (Be sure to distinguish different regions, where appropri¬ 
ate.) 

(2) Is the energy spectrum quantized or continuous? 

(3) Are the stationary states degenerate? 

(4) Are the stationary states bound or continuous? 

[b] Now for Range C: 0 < E < V 2 only, do the following: 

(1) Write down the TISE in each region of x. 

(2) Write down the boundary and continuity conditions on iJ)e(x) in terms of the pieces 
of this function in each region from [b. 1). Compare the number of boundary condi¬ 
tions with the number of unknowns in the general solution of the TISE [keep in mind 
the fact that this (second-order) differential equation has two linearly-independent 
solutions in each region]. Do you have sufficient flexibility to normalize the eigen¬ 
functions? 

(3) Consider the ground state, which we’ll label with n = 0. Is this energy greater or 
less than /two/2? Justify your answer. Now, sketch 7po{x) and, on the same figure, 
the ground-state eigenfunction for a SHO [which is obtained from Eq. (9.12.1) by 
letting a —> 00 and b —* 00 ]. (Feel free to wildly exaggerate the differences between 
these functions, for clarity’s sake.) 

[c] Consider now the symmetric truncated well obtained from Eq. (9.12.1) by setting b = a. 

As in [b], we’ll consider energy range C: 0 < E < V 2 only. 

(1) Do the eigenfunctions of this potential have definite parity? Why or why not? How 
many nodes does ipo(x) have? What is the symmetry of this function? 

(2) In designing a model potential by truncating the SHO, is there any advantage to 
truncating so as to give a symmetric potential? 

Hint: Review your answers to question [b.2]. Think about imposing the boundary 
conditions. 

(3) Suppose the wave-function fairy gave you the analytic form of the ground-state 
spatial function ip 0 (x) and told you to calculate the average value of x for this 
state. What value would you get? Would you expect the same answer if b < a 
(the asymmetric potential)? If so, explain why. If not, would you expect (x ) 0 to 
be greater or less than its value for 6 = a? 

9.13 An Application of the SHO to Molecular Vibrations 

Small-amplitude vibrations of a diatomic molecule can be studied using as a model of the 
true molecular vibrational potential the simple harmonic oscillator potential 

V(x) = \k,x\ (9.13.1) 

Li 

where kf is the force constant. For a typical diatomic molecule, the force constant is roughly 
kf = 1.0 x 10 3 J-m -2 (see Table 9.1). 

[a] Using this value, estimate the value of the zero-point vibrational energy of a diatomic 

molecule (in eV). 

[b] Estimate the energy spacing (in eV) between the ground vibrational state and the first 

excited vibrational state of the molecule. 


432 


Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 




[c] Suppose Ihe molecule undergoes a transition from the first excited vibrational state to the 
ground state, emitting a photon in the process. Estimate the energy, the frequency, and 
the wavelength of the emitted photon. Compare your result with the classical oscillation 
frequency of this system. In what range of the electromagnetic spectrum is this photon 
found? 

9.14 Quantum Oscillations in the Sky? 

If you were on an airplane, staring out the window, you might notice the disquieting fact that 
the wings of the plane oscillate. Careful observation shows that the period of these oscillations 
is typically on the order of 1 sec and the amplitude is typically about 0.1 m. (If the amplitude 
is much greater, the plane will crash and you needn’t worry about solving this problem.) 

[a] Demonstrate that these oscillations could not be due to the quantum-mechanical zero 
point motion of the wings. 

[b] What is the quantum number n of the observed oscillations? 

[c] Suggest an alternative explanation for this phenomenon. 

9.15 A One-dimensional “Hydrogen Atom” 

One of the first “real systems” we’ll study in Volume II is the one-electron atom , the paradigm 
of which is the hydrogen atom. The potential energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom (in 
MKS units) is 


V(r) = - 


4neor' 


(9.15.1) 


where e is the charge on the electron and r is the distance of the electron from the proton. 
The hydrogen atom is, of course, a three-dimensional system, and r is the radial coordinate 
of a spherical coordinate system with the origin at the proton. But we need not wait until the 
next volume to get a feeling for the physics of the hydrogen atom. We can model this system 
by a simple, continuous one-dimensional potential energy whose Schrodinger Equation we 
can solve. The first question is, how to devise such a model. 

Our first thought might be to try a potential energy of the form 


V(x) = 


4tT€o\x\ ' 


(9.15.2) 


where we use |s| to ensure that the spatial coordinate of the electron does not assume negative 
values. [Recall that r in Eq. (9.15.1) is defined on the domain from 0 to oo.] The TISE for this 
potential can be solved, but doing so is mathematically quite difficult, because the potential 
Eq. (9.15.2) has a pole at the origin. And there is another problem with this model: since r is 
defined to be non-negative, spatial functions for the hydrogen atom must be zero for x < 0. 
But this potential does not guarantee that the corresponding bound-state spatial functions will 
be zero for x < 0. 

These considerations motivate us to conjure a simpler one-dimensional model of a hy¬ 
drogen atom, 

V(x) = | 4neox x > ^ . (9.15.3) 

l oo x < 0 


We can determine the bound stationary-state energies of an electron with this potential by 
applying the method of power series that we studied in § 9.7. Let’s go through the solution 
together, step-by-step. 

[a] Simplify the TISE for total energy E by changing the variable of differentiation from x 
to one that is dimensionless. Define this new variable £ in terms of the constant 


ao = 


47re<) K 2 
m,.e 2 ’ 


(9.15.4) 


Exercises and Problems 433 



which is the Bohr radius of the hydrogen atom (see Appendix B). Introduce a dimen¬ 
sionless energy parameter e defined by 


2m e Eal 

“ft 5- "’ 


and the dimensionless length variable £ 


^ = — • 
eao 


(9.15.5) 


(9.15.6) 


Notice that the energy E necessarily appears in the length variable. 

Remark : The differential equation that results from this change of variable, which is 
called Rummer’s equation, can be solved using confluent hypergeometric Wittaker 
functions. 17 However, we’ll just plow on ahead as though we don’t know this. 

[b] The equation you have just derived cannot immediately be solved by, for example, 
inserting into it a power series expansion of ^e(£)- First, we must examine its asymptotic 
solution. Consider your equation in the limit |£| —* oo and determine the asymptotic 
behavior of ^e(0- (Don’t forget to take steps to ensure that this spatial function remains 
physically admissible in this limit.) 

[c] We now introduce a new unknown function /(£) that is defined so the spatial function 
has the form of /(£) times a function that describes the asymptotic dependence of ipE 
on £. Derive the equation that /(£) must satisfy. 

[d] Your equation from part [c] can be solved by a power series, viz.. 


no = (9 - l5 - 7) 

3=0 


in which we must set Co = 0. (Why?) Derive a recurrence relation for the coefficients 
Cj in this series. 

[e] Give an argument to show that the infinite series Eq. (9.15.7) must be truncated at some 
finite order, and show that doing so leads to the restriction that e must equal a positive 
integer. 

[fj From the result to part [e], obtain an expression for the allowed energies of the bound 
states of this model hydrogen atom. Look up the equation for the bound-state energies 
of an actual, three-dimensional hydrogen atom and compare your result to this answer. 
Is Eq. (9.15.3) a good model for determining the energies of this system? Can you think 
of any important physical effects that have been totally ignored in this model? 

[g] Using the recurrence relation of part [d] write down unnormalized spatial functions for 
the first three bound states of this model potential energy. 

9.16 The SHO in Momentum Space 

In Chap. 4 we explored the momentum probability amplitude for a quantum state. This func¬ 
tion, 4>(p), is the Fourier transform of the initial wave function in the position representation, 
$(£,0), i.e.. 


$(P) = 




tf(s,0 )e~ ipx/h dx. 


(9.16.1) 


If the system is in the n th stationary state, then ^(®, 0) = ^„(a;), and this relationship 
becomes 

<fr„(p) = ■ 1 — f %J) n {x)e~ n>Tfh dx. [n th stationary state) (9.16.2) 

v27t h 7-oo 


‘ 17 See A Course in Modern Analysis by Wittaker and Watson (Cambridge University Press, 1969), 
p. 377 ff. 


434 Chap. 9 States of a Particle in One Dimension II 



In this case, the inverse transform relation is 
i r°° 

ip u (x) = —-== / $ n (p)e' px/t ' dp. [n th stationary state] (9.16.3) 

V2nh J_ 00 

Use these relationships to transform the TISE for the SHO into momentum space. To do 
this, substitute Eq. (9.16.3) into the TISE and derive an equation for the momentum probability 
amplitude 4>„ (p). Express your equation in terms of the variables in Table 9.3. Now, solve 
your equation for 4>„(p) for the SHO. 

Remark: The simple harmonic oscillator is one of the few systems (other than the free particle) 
for which the momentum-space Schrodinger Equation is easily solved. When the Schrodinger 
equations of most systems are transformed into momentum space, integral terms appear that 
render their solution difficult mathematically. 

9.17 The Linear Potential in Momentum Space 

In § 4.6 we explored the momentum representation of a quantum state. The expressions 
relating the momentum probability amplitude 4>(p) to the wave function in the position rep¬ 
resentation are given in Fig. 4.12. In § 5.8 we learned how to express x and p in this 
representation [Eq. (5.90)] and how to use these forms to evaluate expectation values. 

[a] Show that in the momentum representation the TISE for the n th stationary state of the 
half-infinite linear potential (9.141) is 

<Mp) = £<Mp). (9.17.1) 

[b] Integrate Eq. (9.17.1), obtaining 

4>„ (p) = $(0)e - i p{ E -p 2 / 6m )/(y Bh ) _ (9.17.2) 

[c] Now use the Fourier transform relationships to transform Eq. (9.17.2) into the position 
representation, thereby regaining the Hamiltonian eigenfunction u (x) of § 9.11. With 
little difficulty, you should obtain the following integral: 


p 2 . d 

2 m + ^ B T P 


1pn{x) = 


6m'yB +P [ X jBj dp ‘ 


(9.17.3) 


You can show that this is equivalent to (9.151) (to within an overall multiplicative 
nonnalization constant) by using the handy Airy relation 


Ai [±(ea) _1/ V = 


cos (ap 3 ± xpj dp. 


(9.17.4) 


Granted, this is not as easy a way to solve the TISE as the method of § 9.11, but it is an 
interesting alternative that sheds more light on the connection between the position and 
momentum representations of a quantum state. 


Exercises and Problems 435 



CHAPTER 10 

Operators in Quantum Mechanics 

The Importance of Being Hermitian 


10.1 Operators in Review: A Capsule Summary of Chapter 5 

10.2 More Mathematics of Quantum-Mechanical Operators 

10.3 Operators with Freedom of Choice: Hermiticity 

10.4 Fun with Adjoints 

10.5 All About Eigenvalue Equations 

10.6 Consequences of Hermiticity I: Real Eigenvalues 
and Orthonormal Eigenfunctions 

10.7 Consequences of Hermiticity II: Completeness 
and Closure 

10.8 Final Thoughts—and a Final Example: The Parity 
Operator 



The tale of Math is a complex one, 
and it resists 

both a simple plot summary 

and a concise statement of its meaning. 

—The Mabinogi 
by Patrick K. Ford 

In Part III we solved several simple one-dimensional problems using the fundamental 
elements of quantum mechanics—wave functions and operators—and Postulates I-IV, 
which assert the existence of these elements and tell us how to interpret them. But our 
ultimate goal is understanding the (more complicated) systems of the microworld: atoms, 
molecules, solids, nuclei. Our ability to solve these systems and to extract the maximum 
amount of physical information from their state functions depends on our mastery of the 
mathematical tools of quantum mechanics. 

So in Part IV we’re going to shift gears again. In the next four chapters, it’s back 
to basics for an intimate look at the elements of quantum physics—operators in this 
chapter and the next, wave functions in Chap. 12. Then, in Chap. 13, we’ll discover 
how these abstract mathematical constructs describe what goes on in the real world of 
laboratory measurements. 

Paradoxically, these chapters involve less algebra but more mathematics than those 
in Part III. 1 And, because this mathematics is at times rather abstract, the relevance of 
some of the topics I’ll introduce may seem a tad remote. Trust me. All will become 
clear. 

In this chapter we concentrate on operators , mathematical instructions that, in i 
quantum physics, represent quantities we can measure in the laboratory. My goal in 
Chaps. 10 and 11 is to help you become familiar with operators, their mathematical 
properties, and the implications of these properties for the physics of microscopic sys¬ 
tems. To this end, we’ll first supplement our grab-bag of mathematical properties of 
operators (from Chap. 5) in § 10.1-10.4. Then, in § 10.5-10.8, we will focus on a 
particular type of operator equation—the eigenvalue equation—and will there discover a 
remarkable and beautiful example of the subtle interweaving of mathematics and physics 
that characterizes quantum theory. This background will prepare us to turn, in Chap. 11, 
to the consequences of the properties of operators for the physics of uncertainty relations, 
conservation laws, and constants of the motion. 


10.1 OPERATORS IN REVIEW: A CAPSULE SUMMARY OF 
CHAPTER 5 

Cast your mind back to Chap. 5. There we learned quantum physicists represent observ¬ 
ables via mathematical instructions called operators. This essential idea was succinctly 
stated in The Third Postulate of Quantum Mechanics (§ 5.4), which bears repeating: 

'The reason is (hat the characteristic manipulations in the branch of mathematics underlying this ma¬ 
terial, linear algebra, are far easier than those of the theory of differential equations. We won’t study linear 
algebra per se\ I have resolutely resisted the temptation to show you the mathematics of quantum mechanics 
in all its (considerable) glory. Still, you should be aware that this theory can be described with a high degree 
of mathematical rigor. For an overview of this description, sec Chap. 8 of Quantum Mechanics, 2nd cd. by 
Eugen Merzbacher (New York: Wiley, 1980). More advanced discussions can be found in Foundations of 
Quantum Mechanics by J. M. Jauch (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1968) and in Mathematical Methods 
of Quantum Mechanics by G. Fano (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971). 


Sec. 10.1 Operators in Review: A Capsule Summary of Chapter 5 437 



Postulate III: 

In quantum mechanics, every observable is represented by an operator that is used to obtain 
physical information about the observable from state functions. For an observable that 
in classical physics is represented by the function Q(x,p), the corresponding operator is 
Q{x,p). 


In Chap. 5 we also learned how to construct quantum-mechanical operators in the 
position and momentum representations, starting from the operators for x and p (see 
Table 10.1). Nearly all operators in quantum mechanics derive from observables that 
can be expressed as functions of x and p. For such a classical function Q(x,p), we can 
design an explicit operator Q = Q(x,p) by inserting the instructions for x and p (in the 
appropriate representation) into Q(x ) p). Thus, all operators can be considered functions 
of the elemental operators x and p. A compendium of the operators we have used so far 
appears in Table 10.2. 2 


TABLE 10.1 FORMS OF THE POSITION AND MOMENTUM OPERATORS 
IN THE POSITION AND MOMENTUM REPRESENTATIONS. 


Fundamental Operator 

Position Representation 

Momentum Representation 



d 

X 

X 

, 0 

+ih— 

dp 

P 

~*h — 

ox 

P 

Reference 

Eq.(5.89) 

Eq. (5.90) 


The Algebra of Operators 

When manipulating operators, we must obey their algebra: the collection of rules that- 
describes how arbitrary operators act on functions and on each other. Particularly im¬ 
portant are the similarities and (especially) the differences between the rules for numbers 
and functions and those for operators. 

The definitions of the sum and difference of two operators A\ and j 4 2 (acting on 
an arbitrary function f) look just like the definition of the sum and difference of two 
numbers or two functions: 

{A 1 ±A 2 )f = A l f±A 2 f. (lO.ltf) 

But, unlike numbers and functions, operators do not necessarily commute. Recall 
that two operators A\ and A 2 commute if for any function /, the function AiA 2 f is 
equal to A 2 A\f. This equality does not hold for two arbitrary operators , so we say “the 
algebra of operators is not commutative,” i.e., 

A\A 2 ^ A 2 A\. non-commutativity (10.1/;) 

2 For a detailed look at the construction of quantum-niechanical operators, see J. R. Shewell, Amer. 
Jour. Phys., 27, 16 (1959). 


438 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 






TABLE 10.2 QUANTUM-MECHANICAL OPERATORS 
(IN THE POSITION REPRESENTATION). 


Observable 

Operator 

Instructions 

position 

X 

multiply by x 

momentum 

P 


kinetic energy 

T 

h 2 d 2 

2 mdx* 

potential energy 

V 

multiply by V(.t, t) 

Hamiltonian 

n 

h 2 8 2 

energy 

£ 

.4 

dt 


We have seen, however, that there exist particular pairs of operators that do com¬ 
mute, such as -p and T. These examples do not contradict the general non-commutativity 
rule (10. \b), for this rule merely states that not all pairs of operators commute. Clearly, 
whether or not two operators commute depends on the particular operators we are talking 
about. 

Commutativity is so important a property that quantum mechanics have introduced 
a special operator called the commutator to express it. The commutator of two operators 
Qi and Q 2 is defined as 3 


[Qi, Q2 ] = Q1Q2 ~ Q2Q1 


commutator. 


(10.2a) 


In terms of the commutator, the general non-commutativity of arbitrary quantum-mechan¬ 
ical operators is written 


[Qu Q2 ] 7^ 0. 


(10.2/b) 


Of course, the commutator of two operators that do commute equals zero (see Table 10.3). 
In Chap. 11 we’ll investigate the commutativity—or lack of same—for various operators 
and the remarkable consequences of this property for measurement of the observables! 
they represent. 


The Role of Operators 


Operators and their commutators play central roles in quantum physics. The key to eval¬ 
uating a statistical property of an observable, such as its expectation value or uncertainty, 


3 In this chapter I will use a slightly different notational convention than in Chap. 5, for now it is 
crucial to distinguish properties of an arbitrary operator from properties that pertain only to operators in 
quantum mechanics— i.e., to “Hermitian” operators (see § 10.3). Throughout the rest of this book, I will use 
A, B, C, ... for an arbitrary operator and Q, R, S ,... for a quantum-mechanical (Hermitian) operator. For 
example, because the commutator is always discussed for Hermitian operators, I have written Eq. (10.2) in 
terms of Q, not A. 


Sec. 10.1 Operators in Review: A Capsule Summary of Chapter 5 439 






TABLE 10.3 COMMUTING AND NON-COMMUTING OPERATORS. 


QlQ2 = Q 2 QI 

Q\ and Q 2 commute 

Example: p and T 

QlQ2 7 £ Q2<3l 

Qi and Q 2 don’t commute 

Example: p and x 


is the operator that represents the observable (c./., § 9.9 and 9.10). For example, the 
expectation value at time t of an observable Q for a state ^(x,t) of a one-dimensional 
system is 


(Q) « = 


^(a, *)<§¥(&, *) dx. 


(10.3a) 


For a three dimensional system, Eq. (10.3/;) becomes the three-dimensional integral 

(Q)(t)= j V*{x,y,z,t)Q'S'{x,y,z ) t)dxdyd^ (10.3b) 

all space 


In §10.2, I’ll introduce a general shorthand for the expectation value that subsumes one- 
and three-dimensional systems. In this “Dirac notation,” the expectation value of Q looks 
like 

«)(*) = <* |Q|*)- (10.3c) 


Operators also appear in the fundamental laws of quantum theory, e.g., the time- 
dependent Schrodinger equation (TDSE), which describes the evolution of a quantum 
state, is the operator equation 

= (10.4a) 


We shall see in Chap. 11 that operators also play a role in the laws that describe the 
evolution of a physical property , such as position, and that these laws bear a remarkable 
resemblance to those of Newton’s classical mechanics. 

Finally, operators define their eigenvalues via eigenvalue equations. For example, 
if the state represented by in the TDSE (10.4a) is stationary, then the state function 
has the special form ^ and this equation reduces to the time-independent 

Schrodinger equation (TISE), 

H^e = EiJ) E . (10.4b) 

As noted in Chap. 7, the TISE exemplifies an important class of equations called eigen¬ 
value equations: is the eigenfunction of the operator H with eigenvalue E. All 

operators have eigenvalue equations, and the study of these equations reveals physical 
conclusions of remarkable generality—statements, for example, that limit our knowledge 
of the microworld. By studying operators we can probe the mysteries of this world. 


10.2 MORE MATHEMATICS OF QUANTUM-MECHANICAL 
OPERATORS 

To flesh out the skeleton of operator algebra we just reviewed, I want to show you a 
couple of additional features. First we’ll discuss linearity, an important mathematical 
property of (nearly all) operators in quantum mechanics. We’ll also find out how to 


440 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




manipulate functions and derivatives of operators and, last but not least, will learn a 
simplified notation that will save fingers and pencils as we venture deeper into the 
formalism of quantum physics. 

Linearity (Superposition in a Mathematical Guise) 

In Chap. 6 we related the principle of superposition to the TDSE. In particular, we 
showed that if and \P 2 are (distinct) state functions of a system with Hamiltonian 7-f, 
then for arbitrary constants c\ and c 2 , the linear combination ci^i + c 2 \P 2 satisfies the 
TDSE: 

(« - e) (ci^i + c 2 4> 2 ) =Ci(h- £) tf i + e 2 (« - tj <P 2 = 0. (10.5) 

Hence this arbitrary linear combination represents a quantum state of the system. Phys¬ 
ically speaking, this is the principle of superposition. Mathematically speaking, it is a 
manifestation of the linearity of the operator H - S. 

Nearly all operators in quantum mechanics are linear. The definition of linearity 
is simplicity itself: if fi and / 2 are arbitrary functions and c\ and c 2 arbitrary complex 
constants, then the operator Q is linear if 

Q (ci/i +c 2 f 2 ) = CiQfi + c 2 Qf 2 • linearity (10.6) 

Notice that this definition is really two properties in one: 

Q(/i+/ 2 ) = Q/i+Q/ 2 (10.7 a) 

Qcf = cQf. (\0.1b) 

It is easy to verify the linearity or lack of same of a particular operator, as is illustrated 
by the following little examples. 

Example 10.1. Linearity of the Linear Momentum Operator 

When we operate on cifi(x) + 02 / 2 ( 2 ) with p = -ihd/dx, the constants slide right through 
the first derivative, unchanged. And, since differentiation is distributive, we conclude 

-ih-^\c y fi{x) + c 2f 2 (x)\ = ci [ - ift^/i(z)] + c 2 [-ih-^f2{x)], (10.8) 

i.e., the operator p is linear. 

Question 10-1 

Prove linearity of p in the momentum representation by operating with the explicit form of 
this operator (see Table 10.1) on an arbitrary linear combination of two momentum-space 
functions gi(p) and g 2 {p)- 

Aside: Anti-linear operators. Lack of linearity does not necessarily imply that an 
operator is useless in quantum mechanics; “anti-linear” operators play a role in some 
branches of our field. An anti-linear operator is one that satisfies the properties 

Q(/l+/2)=0/l+Q/2 (10.9«) 

Qcf = cQf. (10.%) 


Sec. 10,2 More Mathematics of Quantum-Mechanical Operators 441 



The operator in Example 10.2 is anti-linear, as is the time-reversal operator, which is 
important in collision theory. 1 We will not, however, have occasion to use anti-linear 
operators in this book. By the way, an operator that is neither linear nor anti-linear 
is called, sensibly, a “non-linear operator.” 

Example 10.2. An Anti-linear Operator 

Consider the operator that forms the complex conjugate of its operatee: 

Af = f*. (10.10) 

This operator satisfies the first condition of linearity, Eq. (10.7a), because 

A (fi + h) = fi + /a = A/, + Af 2 . (10.1 la) 

But it fails the second test, because 

Acf = c f* ^ cf*. (10.11/?) 

Notice that we cannot salvage this operator by requiring c to be real; the condition (10.7/?) 
must hold for a complex constant. 

Question 10-2 

Consider the operator A that creates the square of the function on which it operates, 

Af(x) = f 2 { x). 

Is this operator linear, anti-linear, or neither? Prove your answer by showing which, if any, 
of the conditions (10.7) or (10.9) it violates. 


Functions of an Operator 

In our sojourns through the fields of quantum mechanics, we’ll often want to manipulate 
operator functions of varying complexity. Nearly all operator functions can be written 
in terms of the elementary operators x and p. Operator functions as simple as p 2 /(2m) 
or mu lx 2 / 2 pose no problem. But more formidable concoctions, such as e Q , are a bit 
trickier. 

We can subdue even the most complicated operator function via its power-series 
expansion : 


Rule 

Any function f(A) of an operator A can be expressed as a power series in A, provided the 
power-series expansion of the corresponding classical function f(A) converges. 5 


4 See Chap. 6 of Scattering Theory by J. R. Taylor (New York: Wiley, 1972). 

5 Although the issue of convergence poses interesting mathematical questions, it is not a problem in 
practice. If you are interested, see, for example, § 9.1 in Principles of Quantum Mechanics by R. Shankar 
(New York: Plenum, 1980). 


442 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 







According to our prescription for generating operators, the coefficients in the series for 
the operator f(A) are the very coefficients bj that appear in the power series expansion 
of the function f(A) t 

f(A) = fS jA j . 00.12) 

j=o 

So once we know the series expansion of the function , Eq. (10.12), we know the expan¬ 
sion of the corresponding operator. 

f(A) = (10 ’ 13) 

3 =o 

Note that if the function f(A) is real, then the coefficients bj in the expansion of the 
operator f{A) are also real. 

Example 10.3. The Exponential Operator 

To use the operator e x we must know its effect on a function of x. To find out, we look to 
the series expansion of the corresponding exponential function e x [c.f, Eq. (9.72)], 

e' = l + z + i* J + !*’ + --- 0014a) 

= IV = ( |014fc) 

i=o 

According to the above rule, the operator e T is simply 

e i = l + x + ±x 2 + ± j i 3 + --- (10.15a) 

= '£b i x i 6, = ^. (10.15*) 

j =0 

Well, that was pretty simple. 


Actually, manipulating operators as series expansions is not always this easy. But 
you’re unlikely to go wrong if you remember the First Golden Rule of Operator 
Algebra: 


/ 


Rule 

To evaluate the product of two or more operators, act with each operator in succession. 


[For example, Q 3 / = QQQ /.] This rule tells us how to evaluate the terms in the 
power series expansion (10.13) we must retain for this series to accurately approximate 
the operator f(A). 

■./ The Derivative of an Operator 

In Chap. 11 we’ll find out how observables in quantum mechanics evolve, a topic that will 
lead us to expressions involving the time derivative of an operator, dQ(t)/dt. Happily, 


Sec. 10.2 More Mathematics of Quantum-Mechanical Operators 443 




such expressions are easy to deal with. The derivative of an operator, which is just another 
operator, is defined like the derivative of a function. And derivatives of operators obey 
the familiar rules of differentiation of functions, e.g.. 


-\ 

dt l 


Ai(£) + A 2 (£) j — — Ai(t) + — A 2 (t) 


f t [Mt)A2(t)]= j t Mt) i 2 (<) + i.(t) 




(10.16a) 

(10.16Z?) 


There is, however, a trap lurking in Eq. (10.16/;); can you see it? 

We must not blithely interchange the order of the operators in the terms on the 

right-hand side, for there is no guarantee that [^Ai(£)l A 2 (t) is the same operator as 


A 2 (t) ^Ai(£)J . These operators are equivalent only if they commute. Thus, in working 
with derivatives of operators, don’t overlook the Second Golden Rule of Operator 


Algebra: 


Rule 

Thou shall not interchange the order of operation of two operators unless thou art sure they 
commute. 


Ubiquitous Integrals (Dirac Braket Notation) 


Certain characteristic integrals are woven throughout the fabric of quantum 
mechanics. Already we’ve calculated expectation values , integrals of the form 
Jf° ^f*(x,t)Q^(x,t)dx [c.f, Eq. (10.3a)]. Somewhat similar integrals appeared in 
our study of non-stationary states of the particle-in-a-box (Example 7.4) and of the 
simple harmonic oscillator (§ 9.10). In both of these examples we had to cope with ma¬ 
trix elements , integrals in which an operator is sandwiched between two different state 
functions, e.g., ^i(x, t)H^ 2 (x, t) dx. In these examples we also had to evaluate 

overlap integrals, which look like matrix eiements but for the absence of an operator, 
e.g., (x, t^^x, t) dx. All these types of integrals can be easily and conveniently 

represented using Dirac braket notation. 

Dirac brakets are just shorthand symbols for integrals. In its most general form, 
the Dirac braket is defined as 


($.1 1 = 

f ^IQ^/odv 

(10.17) 

' ' J 

all space 



By variously labelling the state functions in .(10.17), using the appropriate volume ele¬ 
ments and limits of integration, and retaining or omitting the operator Q, we can accom¬ 
modate all sorts of overlap integrals, expectation values, and matrix elements: 

444 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




(Q) = (*t | 

0*1) = J ,dt> 

expectation value 

( 10 . 18 a) 


all space 



(*1 1 

Q$ 2 )= j V'Qi$ 2 dv 

J 

matrix element 

(10.18ft) 


alt space 



(*: 

l|® 2 >= J dv. 

overlap integral 

(10.18c) 


all space 




The symbol (^i | Q'& 2 ) represents an integral over all the spatial coordinates in 'P, so 
these matrix elements, expectation values, and overlap integrals are just numbers. They 
may be real or complex, and may depend on time. 

The Dirac braket is more “abstract” than the explicit expression for the integral it 
represents, and therein lies its great utility. This notation is simpler because it leaves 
several instructions implicit. To master Dirac brakets, remember these implicit instruc¬ 
tions: 

1. Take the complex conjugate of the state function to the left of the leftmost vertical 
bar. 

2. Act with the operator Q on the function to its right. 

3. Integrate the integrand over all space. 

For example, the Dirac braket for the expectation value of the linear momentum 
of a particle in one dimension in a quantum state represented by ^(x.t) is 

/ oo 

®*(M)|ptf(s,t)] dx. (10.19a) 

■oc 


The braket that represents the energy of a particle in three dimensions in state y , 2 , t) 
is 


( E )(t) = (V \TM) = JJJ y*(x,y,z,t) [Wttfoy.z.i) dxdydz. (10.19ft) 


Dirac braket notation is very flexible. It can even accommodate integrals of 
(Q*i)*» 2, in which the operator acts on the first function, $!. By extension of the 
definition (10.17), we can represent such an integral by 


Note that 


I [o* 1 ]*» 2 dii = <(5*i |»2). 

all space 


so the integral in (10.20) is 

(Q$i | fa) = J [<3**I]$ 2 dw. 

all space 


( 10 . 20 ) 


( 10 . 21 ) 


( 10 . 22 ) 


Sec. 10.2 More Mathematics of Quantum-Mechanical Operators 445 



vertical bar. Usually the braket (*i | Qw 2 ) is written 21 

should cause no confusion provided you remember that m general 


Q | $ 2 } = (*t | 0*2) * (0*1 I * 2 ) ' 


(10.23) 


X IT.) I *-»?«” I '•.) *■» Hermitinn ««•»• ~ •. -» 

SeCti °h mav seem that the only reason for introducing braket notation is to avoid writer’s 

• Tnhip 10 4 which follow from the definition of the Dnac braket, Eq. ( ■ )■ 

quantum mechanic. 

TA BLE 10.4 HANDY PROPERTIES OF DIRAC BRAKET NOTATION. _ 

(#1 | c^ 2 ) = c(*i | * 2 ) () 

(c*i |*a) = c*(*i |* a > 

(tf 1 | *2)* = (*2 | *i) (H1) 

| #3 + *4) = (*1 | *3) + (® 1 | ^4) + (^2 | fr a ) + {*2 1 ^ 4 ) ( } I 


Question 10-3 ... 

Prove properties 1 and III in Table 10.4. Then use these properties to prove Property . 


(0.3 OPERATORS WITH FREEDOM OF CHOICE: HERMITICITY 


I hate definitions. 

—Benjamin Disraeli 
in Vivian Grey 


a physically measurable quantity only if it satisfies a pioperty call© y 

e T his convention originates in 

represent by the wave function 'M&t ) P a lhis ket IS Q I )• In this formulation, 

E W l -rher absrrac, beast tba, represents the state 
with wave function Called a "bra.” this critter ts denoted by <*i |. 

446 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics 1 




/ 


Hermiticity Defined 


What is Hermiticity? Well, in the las. section I made a big deal out of Eq (10 23) 
Cer ‘ ain opera,ors Q is the matrix element (*, | £* 2 )'equal to 
’ 1 ? 2> A EqU ^" y ° f .' hese ma,nx elements is ’ >n fact, the definition of Hermiticity- 
an operator Q is Herm.t.an if for any two physically.admissible state functions #, and 


(^1 I 2 ) = I ^ 2 ) = ($1 | Q | tf 2 ) 


Hermiticity 


(10.24a) 


This definition is so important that I want to show it to you in its full integral glory: 

/ [Q® 2 ] dv = J [t}®,]*®,*,. (10.24b) 

cnarn _u 


all space 


all space 


f‘"“ the e , q " allty ln Eqs - (lq ' 24) must hold for any two state functions, Hermiticity is a 
f Z 2H e 0Pela '°', ! ,S f~ aS W t" ^ in § 10 - 4 ’ Where We ’" liberale this tiefinition 

rom dwwtence bn stale functions.; Notice, by the way, that the double-bar notation 

nlri, , j ' 2 c a) makeS eminent sense for an Hermitian operator, since such an 

matrix e'lemem r • n "" °" 6ither ° r 0n ,he value of 

matrix element is the same in either case. 

Question 10-4 

In some quantum mechanics texts, you will find .his alternate definition of Hermiticity: an 
operator Q is Hermitian if for any physically-admissible stale function f, 

<*!$*> = («*!«-)- (10.25) 

Prove .hat this definition is equivalent to (10.24a) by considering a superposition state whose 
wave function ^ is a linear combination of two state functions, i.e., 


V = Cl^! +C2^2. 

What are the implications of Eq. (10.25) for the expectation value of Q? 


(10.26) 


rt . fln , As y ° U peer at Eqs - ( 10 - 24 ). trying to decipher the meaning of this abstract, remote 
surnnsin"’, T may ^ onder why a » °P era tor S aren't Hermitian. The answer, perhaps 

, 8y ' has " 0,hm ? 10 do Wlth the complex conjugation in this definition—as you 
can see trom the following example. 

Of a system fir « He nni.icily? In Chap. 6 we discovered that .he Hamiltonian H 

I noted [c f Ea (6 82n thar as T ° Vin8 ^ 5 * hat ,he position P robabi lity density of a particle is conserved, 
- tc^tq.j6 1 82)jjha L as_a consequence the Hamiltonian satisfies 

J V'(x t t)H*(x,t)dx= f [HV(x,tj\* %x,t)dx, 

00 J — co 

of'anop^rofi" 1 ^ 5 "!™ 1113 "-, 11,15 " ndin * illus,ra,es hn abslract mathematical property, Hermiticity 

operator, is tied to a physical property, conservation of probability. y 


Sec. 10.3 Operators with Freedom of Choice: Hermiticity 447 




Example 10.4. A Non-Hermitian Operator 


What could be simpler than a first derivative? Let’s find out whether or not the operator 
A = d/dx is Hermitian by testing the definition (10.24/?) for specific states. Let *1 and tf 2 
be the wave functions of the ground and first-excited states of the simple harmonic oscillator 
at t = 0 (see Table 9.6). (Note that these functions are real.) 

For this case, we can easily evaluate the left- and right-hand sides of Eq. (10.24) with 
the aid of Table 9.7; to wit: 




Mx)^Mx)dx = -^ 




<H-£ 

^ 2 ) = / ^ x ^ dx = ~"^|- 


(10.27a) 

(10.27/?) 


Oh what a difference a minus sign can make! Since (10.27a) and (10.27/?) are different, the 
operator A violates the definition (10.24) and hence is not Hermitian. 


Notice that you can disprove Hermiticity by finding a single pair of functions that 
violates the definition (10.24). Novice quantum physicists sometimes mistakenly try to 
prove Hermiticity in the same way, i.e., using only a single pair of functions. (For some 
reason, such attempts usually involve the function e ikx .) So heed well this 


Warning 

You cannot prove that an operator is Hermitian by showing that the definition (10.24) is 
satisfied for a particular function; you must prove it for an arbitrary function. 


JExample 10.5. An Hermitian Operator 

Having shown you an operator that is not Hermitian, it is incumbent upon me to show you 
one that is. The operator p = -ihd/dx is one of the most important in quantum physics, 
so we certainly should check that it is legitimate. To do so, we must answer the burning 
question 

(vj/i | = (p'J/i | 'P 2 )- (10.28a) 

For a one-dimensional system, the integral form of (10.28a) is 

J°° dxl J *)] * j (*. »)<«*• < l0 - 28b > 

We can prove that p is Hermitian if we can manipulate the left-hand side of Eq. (10.28/?) 
into the form of the right-hand side, i.e., if we can shift the first derivative from 'I' 2 (a:,i) to 
^i(a;,i) without otherwise altering the integrand. The most straightforward way to do this 
is to use integration by parts, viz., 8 

^Remember your freshman calculus? There you learned that the definite integral J* u dv can be 
written as 

f b | 6 f b 

/ udv = uv\ - / vdu. 

Ja la da 

dtyl 

To apply this method to Eq. (10.28a), we use u = and dv = -q£- dx. 


448 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




J-0 


. V*" j 


'"a- *'-*V*'» 


dx 


=^I(x,<)^ 2 (x,i)J - J 'if 2 (x,t)-^'i>* l (x y t)dx^. 


(10.29) 


But (x } t) and # 2 (®,Q are normalizable and hence go to zero in the limit x —> ±oo. 
Therefore the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (10.29) is zero, leaving 






dx = (—ih) 



dm 

-Q^-y 2 {x,t)dx 


(10.30a) 


=£[-< tfifot)] V 2 {x,t)dx (10.30/?) 
= (pm | m). (io.30c) 


Ergo, p is Hermitian. 

Another word of advice: Readers unfamiliar with such mathematical demonstra¬ 
tions may be tempted to try manipulating both sides of Eq. (10.28/?), seeking a common 
ground. This is almost invariably the wrong way to approach such a derivation; success 
is much more likely if you will try to manipulate one side into the form of the other, as 
in this example. 

Question 10-5 

Prove from the definition of Hermiticity that the position operator x is Hermitian and that 
xp is not Hennitian. 

Question 10-6 

Prove that A — 31 (where i is the “identity operator,” which does nothing) is Hermitian 
and that A = 3ii is not Hermitian. 


So What? (The Consequences of Hermiticity) 

Hermiticity is important in quantum mechanics because 


Rule 

All operators in quantum mechanics are Hermitian. 


Hermiticity is physically significant because it guarantees that the numbers that quantum 
mechanics predicts for the results of laboratory measurement will be real, not complex. 
This result is so important that we’re now going to prove it: 



Proclamation 10.1 

The expectation values of a Hennitian operator are real. 


Sec. 10.3 Operators with Freedom of Choice: Hermiticity 449 





Argument: To prove this assertion (c./., Question 10-4), I will call upon a basic fact 
about complex numbers: 9 


a number c is real if it is equal to its complex conjugate, c* = c 


(10.31) 


We want to prove that for a Hermitian operator Q, the expectation value 


(Q) = J V'QVdv 

all spare 

is equal to its complex conjugate. This is not hard to do: 

(QY = I 

all space 

dv 

all space 

all space 




But since Q is Hermitian, the integral in (10.33c) is equal to 


(10.32) 


(10.33a) 

(10.336) 

(10.33c) 


/ 

all space 


Qtf dv = (Q ). 


(10.34) 


Ergo 

Q Hermitian => ( Q)* = ( Q ) i.e., (Q ) is real 


(10.35) 


Q. E. D. 

Can you see why Proclamation 10.1 is so important? The expectation value of 
any observable is supposed to be measurable ; it’s the average of values obtained in an 
ensemble measurement of the observable. But numbers measured in a laboratory are 
real, so the expectation value must be real. According to (10.35), this requirement can 
be satisfied if (and only if) the operator that represents the observable is Hermitian. (In 
§ 10.6 we’ll explore further the consequences of Hermiticity.) 

Before leaving this proof, I want to repeat it in Dirac notation: 


(QY = I Qvy 
= {Q* | *) 

— /vp 1 0vI/\ 

[Property III: Table 10.4] 

rHeimitiritv nf Ol 

(10.36a) 

(10.366) 

(10 36c) 

-— 

= (Q) 

[definition (10.32) of (Q)]. 

l A v/ L J 

(10.36rf) 


9 It’s easy to verify Eq. (10.31). A complex number c can be written in terms of its real and imaginary 
parts, as c = a+ib , where a and b are real numbers. The complex conjugate of c is, by definition, c* = a-ib. 
So c* = c only if 6 = 0, i.e., if c is real. (See also Appendix K.) 


450 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 





I 

Notice how much simpler and more elegant this shorthand notation is. Once you become 
reasonably facile with Dirac brakets, you can whip out proofs like this in your sleep. 

I 

Hermitian Operators in Combination 

v 

When presented with an operator that purports to represent an observable, the first thing 
you should do is verify its Hermiticity. Checking the Henniticity of simple operators, 
such as the kinetic energy operator T = p 2 J(2m) or the angular momentum operator 
(in three dimensions) L = r x p, is fairly easy. But not all operators are so simple. As 
the complexity of the dependence of Q on x and p increases, so does the difficulty of 
proving it Hermitian. Fortunately, a simple set of general rules answers the question: 
what functions of one or more operators are Hermitian? For reference, I’ve collected 
these properties together in Table 10.5. Let’s see how to prove them. 



TABLE 10.5 FUNCTIONS OF HERMITIAN OPERATORS: 
ARE THEY HERMITIAN? 


For Hermitian Operators Qi and Q 2 

Operator 

Hermitian 

Not Hennitian 

c = constant 

if c is real 

if c is complex 

c\Q\ + C 2 Q 2 

if ci, cz are real 

if ci, C 2 are complex 

Q\Q2 

if [Qi,Q 2 ] =0 

if [Ql,Q 2 ] 7^0 

Q" (n integer) 

YES 

— 

commutator" [Qi, Q 2 ] 

Q 2 ] 

[QUQ 2 ] 

anticommutator 6 

YES 

— 

a function f(Qi) 

if / is real 

if / is complex 


"The commutator is [Qi,<? 2 ] = Q 1 Q 2 - Q 2 Q 1 
6 The “anlicommulator” is [Qi, Q 2 J- 1 -' = Q 1 Q 2 + Q 2 Q 1 


The simplest operator function is a function that involves only one operator. This 
case is rarely a problem, because 



Rule 

Any real function of a single Hermitian operator is Hermitian. 


This rule takes care of simple operators, such as the potential energy operator of the 
half-infinite linear potential (§ 9.11), as well as troublemakers, such as e® of Exam¬ 
ple 10.3. You can prove it by expanding the arbitrary real operator in a power series, a 
la Eq. (10.13). 


Sec. 10.3 Operators with Freedom of Choice: Hermiticity 451 



Question 10-7 

V / Prove from the definition of Hermiticity that the kinetic and potential energy Operators for 
\y/ the simple harmonic oscillator, T and V^cc) = mu> qX 2 /2, are Hermitian. Isn ^ ft eas j er t0 

use the properties in Table 10.5? 

More interesting conundrums arise if two or more operators are in\olv«sd, for then 
the Hermiticity of the operator function depends critically on the nature of the constituent 
operators. For example, x and p are Hermitian; but not all functions of ^ anc j p are 
Hermitian—a point illustrated in Table 10.6 and in the following example. 


/• 



TABLE 10.6 HERMITIAN AND 
NON-HERMITIAN COMBINATIONS 
OF x AND p. 


Hemiitian 

Non-Hemiilian 

x, p 

xp, px 

i [*, p] 

[*. P\ 


Example 10.6. The Product of Two Hermitian Operators 

Let Q\ and Qi be Hemiitian operators; i.e., suppose that for arbitrary physical ly- a drr»i SS ibl e 
state functions and ^ 2 , 


(tfi |Qi | ^2) = <^2 |Qi |*i> 

<*1 | Q2 I *2) = <*2 I Q2 | *i>. 


(10.37«) 

(10.37/;) 


Our goal is to find the conditions (if any) under which the product operator Q 3 = Q 1 Q 2 is 
Hemiitian; i.e., 

/ oc poo 

^l(x,t)Q 3 ^ 2 {x t t)dx = / [Q 3 ^i(x,t)Y <H 2 (x,t)dx, (10.38a) 

-OO J-oc 


or, in Dirac Notation 


1 | Q 3 ^ 2 ) = (Qa* 1 | ^ 2 >. 


(10.38/;) 


We can explore this question using the Hermiticity of Q 1 and Qi and the meaning 
of a product of two operators: 



(10.39a) 

I [Oi'Mx.Ol'&'MM)*' 

J -OO 

f°° * 

(10.39/;) 

/ [5aQi«i(*.0] V- 2 {x,tJdx. 

J — oc 

(10.39c) 


Notice carefully that I had to put Q 2 before Q\ in Eq. (10.39c). The expression in (10.39c) 
is not equal to the right-hand side of Eq. (10.38) unless Q 2 Q 1 = QiQ?' *•?., unless these 
Hermitian operators commute. 


452 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




We have discovered another rule: 


Rule 

The product of two Hennitian operators is Hennitian if and only if the two operators 
commute. 



O 



It is convenient to express this finding in terms of the commutator of Qi and Q 2 , which 
is defined in Eq. (10.2a): 10 

(10.40) 

Question 10-8 

Under what conditions on three Hennitian operators Qi, Q 2 , and Q 3 is the product 
Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 Hermitian? Can you generalize your result to the product of N Hermitian 
operators? 

1 1 

We have already evaluated the commutator of x and p in Example 5.4, 

[x,p] = xp - px = ihl. (10.41) 

Since [&,p] ^ 0, the product xp is not Hennitian (see Question 10-5). 

Question 10-9 

The anti-commutator of two operators Q\ and Q 2 is defined as 

[Qi>Q 2 ]+ = Q 1 Q 2 + Q 2 Q 1 . anti-commutator (10.42) 

Show that the anti-commutator of x and p is Hennitian. What quantum-mechanical 
operator should be used to represent the classical observable xpl 


Q 3 = Q\Q 2 is Hennitian [Qi t Q 2 ] = 0 



Here’s what the above proof looks like in Dirac notation [see Eq. (10.38/?)]: 

(^1 | Q 1 Q 2 V 2 ') = (Qi'I'i | $ 2 ^ 2 ) [Henniticity of Qi] (10.43a) 

= (^Qi'I'i | ^ 2 ) [Henniticity of Q 2 ] (10.43/;) 

= (Q\Q 2 ^i I ^ 2 ) [if [0 1 >O 2 ] =0]. (10.43c) 

So much for the product of two Hermitian operators. But other combinations of 
these operators are possible, e.g., their sum. 

Example 10.7. Linear Combinations of Hermitian Operators 

Suppose Q\ and Q 2 are Hennitian operators and ci and c 2 are complex constants. Is 
Qz = C 1 Q 1 + C 2 Q 2 Hermitian? Go ahead, take a guess. 


*** Pause while reader ponders *** 


Now let’s find the answer. 


,0 The symbol <*==> is mathematicians’ notation for “if and only if,” also known in the trade as “iff." 

Sec. 10.3 Operators with Freedom of Choice: Hermiticity 453 





All we need to answer this question (using Dirac notation) are the properties in 


Table 10.4. By Property IV, we have 

(^1 | (ciQi + C 2 Q 2 )^ 2 ) = (^1 | ciQi'I' 2 ) + (^i | 0202 ^ 2 )- (10.44) 

Using the Hermiticity of Q\ and Q 2 , the right-hand side of (10.44) becomes 

= (Qi^i | citf 2 > + <Q 2 ^i I c 2 ^ 2 ). (10.45) 

Moving the constant to the left of each bar, we obtain 

('I'i | (ciQi "TC 2 Q 2 )^ 2 ^ = (ciQi^i | ^ 2 ) + (c2<52^i I ^ 2 ) (10.46a) 

= ((c;0i+Cj0 2 )»i I #2>. (10.46ft) 


[Notice carefully that I had to take the complex conjugate of the constants when I moved 
them. If you don’t understand why, write out Eq. (10.45) in its full integral form and derive 
from it Eq. (10.46a).] But the operator to the left of the bar in Eq. (10.46b) is not equal to 
Qs unless ci and C 2 are real. So only in this special case is Q 3 Hermitian: 


Rule 

An arbitrary linear combination of two (or more) Hermitian operators is Hermitian if 
and only if the constants in the linear combination are real numbers, 

Q 3 = C 1 Q 1 + C 2 Q 2 is Hermitian <$=> ci and C 2 are real (10.47) 


Question 10-10 

Repeat the proof of Eq. (10.47) using the full integral form of the matrix elements involved. 

To show you how to check Heriniticity using the rules in Table 10.6, I’ll work one 
final example. 


Example 10.8) The Kinetic Energy Operator 


The kinetic energy operator 



(10.48) 



is the product of a real constant and the operator pi 2 . Since p is Hermitian, so is any 
power of p. And the product of a real constant times a Hermitian operator is another 
Hermitian operator. So, with little difficulty and without explicit recourse to the definition 
(c./., Question 10-7), we confidently conclude that T is a Hermitian operator. 

Question 10-11 

Prove that the Morse potential [see Figs. 8.2 and 9.14] 


V^ a: ) =.D (l - e n(a: T —) 2 —a-=-a-real-constant 

is Hermitian. 


Question 10-12 

Prove that the Hamiltonian of a particle in the Morse potential of Question 10-11, ii = 
T + V, is Hermitian. 


454 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




Question 10-13 

Consider a system with a Hamiltonian H in a state represented by The probability of 
finding the particle anywhere in space is the integrated probability [see § 3.4 and Eq. (6.64)] 

P([-oo,oo],f) = | $). (10.49) 

Suppose the potential energy in were a complex function. Would the total probability 
Eq. (10.49) still be conserved? Why or why not? Can you think of any conceivable 
application of this exercise? 


Question 10-14 


Use the properties of the Dirac braket in Table 10.4 to prove that for arbitrary physically- 
admissible state functions 'Iq and ^ 2 , 


Q Hermitian => | Q | tf 2 ) = | Q | 

From this result prove Proclamation 10.1. 


(10.50) 


10.4 FUN WITH ADJOINTS 


Do not imagine 

that mathematics is hard and crabbed, 
and repulsive to common sense. 

It is merely 

the etherealization of common sense. 

—William Thompson (Lord Kelvin) 
1824-1907 


In § 10.3, I asserted that Hermiticity is a property of operators , unrelated to the state 
functions on which they operate. Yet, I defined this property in Eq. (10.24a) in terms of 
I state functions \Fi and \P 2 . If Hermiticity pertains solely to an operator , then we should 
I be able to define it independently of state functions. Mathematicians know how to do 
this, using a quaint and curious beastie called “the adjoint.” 

What is an adjoint? Well, consider the following whimsical puzzle: Suppose A is 
an arbitrary operator, not necessarily Hermitian. For any two state functions construct 
the matrix element 


(^ 1 |i^ 2 >= J ^\[A^ 2 ]dv. (10.51) 

all space 

This matrix element is just a number. Find another operator, say B , such that the number 
{B^ 1 | ^ 2 ) equals (#! | ^^ 2 ). the operator B is defined by 

(B*, |$j)= J [B4' 1 ]** 2 dv = <* l |i«' ;i >. (10.52) 

all space 


Sec. 10.4 Fun with Adjoints 455 



The desired operator is called the adjoint of A, denoted A ] , and I’m going to show you 
how to construct it. 11 That is, the adjoint of A is the operator A t such that 


{A^i\ tf 2 ) = (^i | itf 2 ) 


adjoint. 


C 10.53) 


^Example 10.9. The Adjoint of the First Derivative Operator 

In Example 10.4 we demonstrated that the operator A = d/dx is not Hermitian. To find 
the adjoint of this operator we use integration by parts (c./, Example 10.5). For a one¬ 
dimensional system, the matrix element we must juggle is 


('I'i | A<& 2 ) = j dx 

= [*;*»]|J ^2(x,t)dx. 


C 1 0.54a) 
C 1 0.54ft) 


Since the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (10.54ft) is zero (why?), we must grapple 
with only the second term. To identify the adjoint of A, we must write this term so it looks 
like the left-hand side of (10.53): 


/ oo r o 

(10.55) 

This manipulation unmasks the adjoint: 

d - t d 

A= di =* A =~Tx' C10 - 56 ) 

which is consistent with Example 10.4. 

Question 10-15 

Consider A = c, where c is a complex number. Prove that A* = c*. 


The Adjoint of a Hermitian Operator 

A Hermitian operator has a particularly simple adjoint, as you should be able to imme¬ 
diately deduce from the definition of Hermiticity (10.24a) and of the adjoint (1 0.53): 12 


Rule 

A Hermitian operator is its own adjoint, and, conversely, an operator that equals its own 
adjoint is Hermitian; i.e., 

Q Hermitian Q f = Q. (10.57) 


11 Mathematicians also refer to the adjoint of an operator as its “Hermitian conjugate” whether or not 
the operator in question is Hermitian. To avoid the obvious source of confusion, I’m going to use only the 
term “adjoint.” 

12 Equation (10.57) explains why mathematicians often refer to a Hermitian operator as “self-adjoint.” 


456 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




' So one way to determine whether or not a particular operator is Hermitian is to 

find its adjoint and just look at it. But, to judge from Example 10.9, this scheme is no 
simpler than direct application of the definition of Hermiticity. Happily, the determination 
of adjoints is rendered quite easy by a host of general properties, the most important of 
which appear in Table 10.7. 


TABLE 10.7 OPERATORS AND 
THEIR ADJOINTS. 



Operator 

Adjoint. 

A 

ciAi + C 2 A 2 

AB 

[AB] 

[i,B] + 

At 

c\A\ +c*A * 2 
BtAt 

[At, fit] 

[AB] + 

At A 



Question 10-16 

Prove that if A is linear, so is A f . 

Question 10-17 

Prove from the definition of the adjoint that ( AB ) f = B ] A ] and derive the adjoint of the 
anticommutator [A, B ] + . 

Example 10.10. The Position-Momentum Product Reconsidered 

We can ascertain whether the operator xp is Hermitian by inspecting its adjoint. With 
Table 10.7 at hand, evaluating the adjoint of xp is a snap: 


(xp)* = p* x* 
= px, 


(10.58a) 
(10.58 h) 


where in the last step I used the Hermiticity of x and of p. Since x and p don’t commute, 
px £ xp , and we conclude that the operator xp is not Hermitian. 

Question 10-18 

j Determine the adjoint of the operator xT , where t is the kinetic energy operator (10.48). 

' v ' Is xT Hermitian? 


The adjoint provides a useful (albeit abstract) tool for studying Hermiticity and 
manipulating operators. But the real reason for introducing all these tools is to study the 
physics of operators in quantum mechanics. To a great extent, the importance of these 
operators rests in their eigenvalue equations, to which we now turn. 


Sec. 10.4 Fun with Adjoints 457 




10.5 ALL ABOUT EIGENVALUE EQUATIONS 


“Is there any other point to which 
you would wish to draw my attention?” 
“To the curious incident 
of the dog in the night-time.” 

“The dog did nothing in the night-time.” 
“That was the curious incident,” 
remarked Sherlock Holmes. 

—Silver Blaze 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 




An operator can wreak considerable havoc, transforming the function on which it acts 
into a quite different function. Consider, for example, the effect of the linear momentum 
operator on the initial wave function for a simple harmonic oscillator in its first excited 
(stationary) state (Table 9.6): 

p$,(x,0) = - ih £ [2 AiPxe-^ 12 ] (10.59) 

= -2i/Ui/fe-' 3V /2 (1 - /?V) , (10.60) 

where is the normalization constant of Eq. (9.106). Observe that the dependence on 
x of the function p^i(o;,0) is quite different from that of # \{x, 0). 

But something strange happens when the system Hamiltonian operates on this 
function: we get 

W^O) = 7#iM = £iV>i(z)- (10.61) 

There are two reasons why the Hamiltonian operator gives back the same function times 
a constant: first, ^\{x,0) = ipi(x) is a stationary-state wave function; and second, 
Eq. (10.61) is just the time-independent Schrodinger Equation (TISE). As noted in 
Chap. 7, the TISE is an eigenvalue equation , and ^i(.r,0) = 0i(®) is an eigenfunc¬ 
tion of the Hamiltonian with eigenvalue Ei. 13 

Eigenvalue Equations on Parade 

The form of the eigenvalue equation for an operator A with eigenfunction an d 
eigenvalue a is 

Axa = a Xa- eigenvalue equation (10.62) 

The collection of all the eigenvalues of A is called the spectrum of this operator. The 
number of eigenvalues in the spectrum may be (and usually is) infinite. And these values 
may be discrete, continuous, or both. For example, the spectrum of the Hamiltonian of 
an infinite square well—the energies obtained by solving the TISE—is discrete (§ 7.4); 
that of the Hamiltonian for a barrier potential (§ 8.6) is continuous; and that of the finite 
square well (§ 8.8) includes both discrete and continuous eigenvalues. 

A notational note: when discussing discrete eigenvalues, we may label the eigen¬ 
function by the eigenvalue, as in (10.62), or by an index j, e.g.. 


13 The word “eigenvalue” is of German origin and means “proper value,” “self value,” or “characteristic 
value.” In fact, some mathematicians refer to eigenvalue equations as “characteristic equations.” 


458 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 



/ Axj = GjXj- [discrete eigenvalues only] (10.63) 

Continuum eigenvalues are their own index— i.e., they are used to label their eigenfunc¬ 
tions, as in Eq. (10.62). 

Example 10.11. A Cornucopia of Eigenvalue Equations 

In our journey through quantum physics we have espied several eigenvalue equations other 
than the TISE. While making the acquaintance of the linear momentum operator (Chap. 5)‘ 
we solved the equation 


PXr = PXr 


for the eigenfunction 


Xp(s) = 


_J_ e >rx/n 
\/27r h 


(10.64) 


(10.65) 


Recall that the prefactor multiplying this eigenfunction ensures that it will satisfy Dirac 
Delta Function Normalization, i.e., 


(*/>' | X P ) = <5(p' -p). (10.66) 

The eigenvalue equation (10.64) has only continuum eigenvalues, as does the corresponding 
equation for the position operator, 


xXx 0 (x) = XoXxq (x). (10.67a) 

The Dirac Delta function shows up in a most peculiar way in the eigenvalue equation 
for the position operator : it turns out that <5(x - x 0 ) is the eigenfunction of this operator 
with eigenvalue xo, i.e., 

x6(x - x 0 ) = x 0 6(x - x 0 ). (10.67 b) 



We’ll return to the ramifications of this odd result in Chap. 13. I should note, though, that 
it makes a screwy kind of sense: were the state function of an ensemble of particles an 
eigenfunction of position, then the location of the members of the ensemble would be well- 
defined (i.e., sharp). This physical situation is reflected by the eigenfunction in (10.67a): 
out-of all possible locations, the Dirac Delta function 6(x - xo) “selects” x 0 (recall the 
discussUnfof this function in Chap. 4 and Appendix L). [Don’t forget, though, that because 
<5(x - xo) can’t be normalized, it’s not physically admissible.] 

We have also glirtipsed the eigenvalue equation for the parity operator in our studies 
of. bound-state‘eigenfunctions of symmetric potentials [c.f., § 8.7]. The parity operator, 
which we denote by ft, inverts the spatial coordinates of a function through the origin, taking 
x into -x: 


ft/(x) = /(—x). parity operator 


( 10 . 68 ) 


The simple spectrum of n includes only two discrete eigenvalues, +1 (for an even function) 
and -1 (for an^odd function): 



ft/(x) = 


T f (x) if f(x) is even 

-/(x) if /(x) is odd 


eigenfunctions 
of the parity operator 


(10.69) 


In § 10.8 we’ll prove that these are the only eigenvalues of the parity operator and will 
scrutinize the eigenfunctions of this important operator. 


Sec. 10.5 All About Eigenvalue Equations 459 



What to Do in Case of Degeneracy 

The labelling of eigenfunctions becomes a bit more complicated for degenerate eigen¬ 
values. If, to an eigenvalue q, there corresponds one and only one eigenfunction Xq> 
then this eigenvalue is non-degenerate. This parlance is an obvious extension of our 
use in Chap. 9 of the word “non-degenerate” to describe energy eigenvalues. In § 9.4 
(Proclamation 9.1) we proved that the bound-state eigenfunctions of a one-diinensional 
system are unique, so their energies are non-degenerate. In fact, this proof illustrates a 
general principle: 


Rule 

The discrete eigenvalues of any operator that represents an observable of a single-particle 
system in one dimension are non-degenerate. 


This principle does not hold for two- and three-dimensional systems; non does it 
pertain to many-particle systems. The bound-state energies of the (one-electron) hydrogen 
atom, for example, are degenerate: to each eigenvalue E n of the H atom Hamiltonian 
(where n is an integer n > 1) there correspond 2n 2 distinct eigenfunctions. (Remember 
that by “distinct” we mean linearly independent.) The jargon appropriate to this situation 
is: the bound-state energies of the H atom are “2n 2 -fold degenerate.” 

Eigenstates 

In quantum mechanics, we are particularly interested in eigenvalue equations for the state 
function, e.g., 14 


Qty q = qV q . eigenstate (10.70) 

Such a state is so important we give it a special name: an eigenstate: 


vR an eigenfunction of Q => system in an eigenstate of the observable Q 


(10.71) 


There is, of course, no guarantee that the state represented by ^ is an eigenstate of any 
operator. But for most states of most systems, we can find one (or more) operators that 
act on \I> to produce this function times a constant, the eigenvalue. So remember the 
following: 


14 1 have purposely left unspecified the spatial variables and the time in this equation (and in many 
others in this chapter) to emphasize the generality of abstract equations such as (10.70). In one dimension, 
this eigenvalue equation looks like 

QV(x,t) = qty(x } t). 


It is important to realize that unless Q explicitly contains the time or derivatives thereof, it is the coordinate 
dependence of ^ that is important in its eigenvalue equation. For this reason, many authors write this equation 
as 

QVt(x) = qVt(x). 

I’m using subscripts for other things, so I won’t use this convention. 


460 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 





Warning 

Equation (10.71) must hold at all times if the state represented by is an eigenstate of Q\ 
the system is not in an eigenstate if this equation is (accidentally) satisfied at one (or more) 
particular times. 


The most familiar example of an eigenstate is a stationary state, which is an energy 
eigenstate. To see why, we need only recall that the wave function of such a state is 
separable, 

= 'ip E e~ iEtln . (10.72) 

Hence this state function is an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian , 

iW E = E*B, (10.73) 

which means that the state is an eigenstate of the energy. 

Question 10-19 

Prove that a simple harmonic oscillator in its (stationary) ground state is not in an eigenstate 
of linear momentum. 


A system can be (and, in fact, usually is) in an eigenstate of more than one 
observable. All that is required is that the state function be an eigenfunction of both of 
the corresponding operators, e.g.. 


Ql^qi.q 2 ~ 91^171 ,<72 

Q2^qi.q 2 = Q2^qi,q 2 - 


simultaneous eigenstate of Q\ and Q 2 


(10.74) 


As the label on Eq. (10.74) attests, we call such a state a simultaneous eigenstate of 
the observables. 15 

For example, the stationary states of the symmetric finite square well are eigenstates 


of energy, 




-to 

11 

■♦0 

& 

(10.75a) 

and of parity 





(10.75/;) 


(Remember that the ground state of this system is even and is labelled by n = 1.) 
Thus, these states are simultaneous eigenstates of energy and parity. The subject of 
simultaneous eigenstates will come into its own in Chap. 11. 


Question 10-20 

Are the stationary states of an asymmetric square well simultaneous eigenstates of energy 
and parity? ... of ener gy a nd any other operator you ca n think of?_ 


15 There is more to this remark than meets the eye. A quantum system can be characterized, in a very 
abstract way, by the set of all operators of which the state function is an eigenfunction. Such a set is said to 
be “complete” (a word we’ll meet in a different context in § 10.7). Since these operators all commute with 
one another, this set is called the “complete set of commuting operators” of the system—its CSCO. For a 
succinct introduction to the CSCO, see § 4.6 of A Quantum Mechanics Primer by Daniel T. Gillespie (London: 
International Textbook, 1970). 


Sec. 10.5 All About Eigenvalue Equations 461 




Question 10-21 

In Chap. 4 we studied the pure-momentum function of the free particle, = 

A e -, Ii >a:_E, )/ A . Of what two operators is this a simultaneous eigenfunction? Why is 
such a simultaneous eigenstate not seen in the laboratory? 

Eigenstates and Measurement 

Quantum mechanics care whether or not a system is in an eigenstate of an observable 
because of the consequences for measurement of the observable. For example, as we 
learned in Chap. 7 and saw illustrated in Chaps. 8 and 9, in an energy eigenstate (10.72) 
the energy is sharp. In statistical terms, this statement means that the average value of 
energy is equal to the eigenvalue ofH, and the uncertainty in the energy is zero: 

{ (E) (t) — E 

. ,- 1 /«\ n • [energy eigenstate] (10.76) 
Afs(£) = 0 

This is not merely an abstract mathematical result. It means that if you wander into your 
lab and perform an ensemble measurement of the energy of a particle that’s in an energy 
eigenstate, you’ll find that all members exhibit the same value, the eigenvalue E. Were 
the ensemble in a non-stationary state, however, the results of your measurement would 
be quite different (a situation we’ll confront in Chap 12). 

Equation (10.76) suggests a provocative connection between the eigenvalue equa¬ 
tions for a state function and the results of measurement of an observable Q, a connection 
shown schematically in Fig. 10.1. The proof of this connection follows rather simply 
from the definitions of (Q) and A Q. 



(a) 



(b) 


Figure 10.1 A symbolic representation 
of measurement Mq of an observable Q 
on a quantum system initially in (a) an 
eigenstate of Q represented by state 
function 'F <J ; (b) a state that is not an 
eigenstate of Q. The box in each figure 
denotes the measurement apparatus, and 
the arrows to the right of the box show 
the results exhibited by a few of the huge 
number of members in the ensemble on 
which the measurement is performed. 


Proclamation 10.2 

In an eigenstate of an observable, the uncertainty of this observable is zero, and its expec¬ 
tation value is equal to the eigenvalue of the operator that represents the observable. 


Argument: In mathematical language, this conjecture reads 

-AQ(*)—0— 




(Q)(t) = q 


(10.77) 


We can prove both parts of (10.77) by deft use of the eigenvalue equation Q^ q — qty, r 
Thus, the expectation value 

(Q) ( t ) = (tf f/ | Q | *,) = (*„ | Q* (l ) (10.78 a) 


462 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 





becomes 


(Q) (t) = <$, | «*,) = q{V q | *,). (10.78fo) 

The state function is normalizable, so ('ifq | ty q ) = 1, and the right-hand side of (10.78ft) 
is just q. Therefore 

(Q) (t) = q [in an eigenstate of Q with eigenvalue q] (10.79) 

We’ll use the same strategy to prove that A Q{t) = 0. We begin with the square 
of this quantity, 

(AQ) 2 = (Q 2 ) - (Qf (10.80a) 

= (Q 2 ) - 9 2 - [by Eq. (10.79)1 (10.800) 

And we can easily evaluate the remaining expectation value, ( Q 2 ), by repeated applica¬ 
tion of the eigenvalue equation and another judicious application of normalizability: 


(Q 2 ) = («, 1 QQ%) 


(10.81a) 


[by the eigenvalue equation] 

(10.81ft) 

= 9 2 (#o | *,) 

[by the eigenvalue equation] 

(10.81c) 

= 9 2 . 

[by normalizability of ty] 

(10.8k/) 

Substituting this result into Eq. (10.80ft), 
whence 

we find, not surprisingly, that (A Q) 2 = 0, 

A Q = 0 [in an eigenstate of Q with eigenvalue q] 

(10.82) 

Q. E. D. 


i Proclamation 10.2 assures us that we can be certain (within the limits of experi¬ 

mental accuracy) of the outcome of a measurement of an observable Q on a system that 
is in an eigenstate of Q: in such a measurement, all members yield the same value, the 
eigenvalue q. 

Proclamation 10.2 also shows how to determine experimentally whether or not 
a system is in an eigenstate of a particular observable: we just perform an ensemble 
measurement of the observable and see if all members give the same value. If so, the 
system is in an eigenstate. If, instead, the results fluctuate about ( Q), then it is not in 
an eigenstate of the observable we measured—although it could be in an eigenstate of 
some other observable. 16 



For example, the ground-state of the simple harmonic oscillator is an eigenstate of 
energy and parity [recall that ^(x) is an even function], but it’s not an eigenstate of p, 
nor of x , as we proved in Examples 9.4 and 9.5. So a measurement of the energy of a 
SHO in such a state will yield the same result, unlike a measurement of position. 


16 Actually, this procedure is a little tricky. As we’ll learn in Chap. 13, if an ensemble is not in an 
eigenstate of Q before measurement of this observable, it will be after the measurement. That is, were we 
to test an ensemble that originally was not in an eigenstate by measuring Q, then after the measurement the 
ensemble would be in an eigenstate of Q and hence would differ from the original ensemble. So in practice 
we must effect our verification measurement on a sub-ensemble of the original ensemble of interest. 


Sec. 10.5 All About Eigenvalue Equations 463 





10.6 CONSEQUENCES OF HERMITICITYI: REAL EIGENVALUES 
AND ORTHONORMAL EIGENFUNCTIONS 


In the last section we discussed the eigenvalue equation for an arbitrary operator. But in 
quantum mechanics, operators aren’t arbitrary; they’re Hermitian. And the properties of 
the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of Hermitian operators are very special indeed. 



On the Reality of Eigenvalues 


We have proven (Proclamation 10.1, § 10.3) that the expectation value of a Hermitian 
operator Q with respect to an arbitrary quantum state 

(Q) = J (10.83) 

all space 


is a real number. This property is important because we can measure (Q) in the labora¬ 
tory. We have also proven (Proclamation 10.2, § 10.5) that for a system in an eigenstate 
of Q, the expectation value (10.83) reduces to the appropriate eigenvalue q of the operator 
Q, i.e., 

Q* q = qV q => (< Q)=q ■ 00.84) 

The obvious implications of these two facts is that the set of all eigenvalues {< 7 } of any 
Hermitian operator Q consists of real numbers. 

But this argument is deceptive, for it seems to hinge on the eigenfunction of Q 
being a state function. As we’ll now prove, the eigenvalues of a Hermitian operator are 
real regardless of the precise nature of the eigenfunctions. 


Proclamation 10.3 

The eigenvalues of a Hennitian operator are real numbers. 


Argument: We seek a proof that 

Q Hermitian => eigenvalues { 9 } are real 

The eigenvalue equation for an arbitrary Hermitian operator is 17 

QXq=QXq■ (10.85) 

We know one way to prove that an eigenvalue q is real: show that it is equal to its 
complex conjugate [cf, Eq. (10.31)], i.e., prove that q* = q. To this end, we first must 


17 The discussion of this section becomes needlessly complicated if the eigenvalues in question are 
continuous. So in the text, I’ll assume that all eigenvalues are discrete. [But I will label eigenfunctions by their 
eigenvalues, not by an index, as in (10.63); students seem to find the latter notation convenient in solutions of 
problems but confusing in proofs of properties.] In footnotes and asides, Til show you what these results look 
like for a spectrum that includes continuous eigenvalues. Feel free to skip the footnotes if you aren’t interested 
in the more general case. 


464 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 





isolate q. We do so by multiplying Eq. (10.85) on the left by x q and integrating over all 
space, viz., 18 


(x, | Qx„) = ?(x, | x,)- 

Now, the eigenfunctions {x 9 } can be normalized, so we can use 

(10.86) 

(Xq | Xq) = 1 normalization of eigenfunctions 

(10.87) 

to simplify Eq. (10.86), obtaining 

9 = <X« 

QXq)- 

(10.88a) 

The complex conjugate of (10.88 a) is 

Q* = (Xq | QXqY- 

The rest of the proof that q* = q is a snap: 

(10.886) 

Q* = (QXq \Xq), [Property III: Table 10.4] 

(10.89a) 

= (Xq | QXq)> [Hermiticity of Q] 

(10.896) 

= q. [by Eq. (10.88a)] 

(10.89c) 


[Notice that in (10.896) I moved Q to the right of the bar, so I could use the eigenvalue 
equation to eliminate this operator from the Dirac braket.] 

Q. E. D. 

The importance of this property will become evident in Chap. 13, which deals with 
measurement in quantum mechanics. There we’ll discover the remarkable fact that the 
eigenvalues of a Hermitian operator are the only values we could obtain in a measurement 
of the observable represented by the operator. So these numbers must be real. And, for 
Hermitian operators, they are. 

On the Orthogonality of Eigenfunctions 

Of the many properties of the set {x q } of eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator Q, the 
most familiar is its linear independence, i.e., 

^2/ C qXq = 0 4=> c q = 0 for all q. linear independence (10.90) 

all q 

But the functions {Xg}> which we obtain by solving (somehow) the eigenvalue equation, 
have three other properties of great importance in quantum theory, each of which has 
affiliated with it special jargon: 


Rule 

The eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator are orthogonal, constitute a complete set, and 
satisfy closure. 


18 Remembcr that the “integral over all space" embraces all spatial coordinates in the eigenfunction. 
For a single particle in one dimension, this integral is • • • dx\ for a single particle in three dimension, 

it is J • • • dv. For a many-particle system, it is a multiple integral over the spatial coordinates of all 

all space 

particles (see Volume II). 


Sec. 10.6 Real Eigenvalues and Orthonormal Eigenfunctions 465 




V-^ 








I now want to show you what these words mean, beginning with the one you’re probably 
familiar with: orthogonality . 19 

Orthogonality is an important (and familiar) property of vectors. The x and y axes 
of a Cartesian coordinate system, for example, are orthogonal. Letting e x and e y denote 
unit vectors along these axes, we can express their orthogonality mathematically using 
the dot product, as e x -e y = 0. There is, in fact, a close analogy between the mathematics 
of vectors and of eigenfunctions; this parallel is a consequence of the fact that both are 
described by the same branch of mathematics, linear algebra. 

But in quantum mechanics, when we say that two (non-degenerate) eigenfunctions 
with different eigenvalues are orthogonal, we mean simply that their overlap integral 
is zero. To illustrate this general property in a specific case, consider the Hamiltonian 
eigenfunctions for the ground and first-excited states of a one-dimensional simple har¬ 
monic oscillator. In Fig. 10.2 are graphs of these eigenfunctions and of their product 
The area under this curve, fT oc ' l l J o( x )' l Pi( x ) dx, is the overlap of ipo(x) 
and ipi{x). It is clear from the figure that the positive and negative contributions to this 
integral are equal, so 

f ipo(x)7pi(x) dx = 0, (10.91tf) 

J — OG 

or, in Dirac notation, 

<*>|^i} = 0. (10.916) 

Equations (10.91) are the mathematical statements of the orthogonality of ipo(x) and 
ipi(x). But this property is no accident; it occurs because these functions are eigenfunc¬ 
tions of an operator (H) that is Hermitian, as I now propose to prove. 


Proclamation 10.4 

Eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator whose (non-degenerate) eigenvalues are different 
are orthogonal. 


Argument: In Dirac notation, we express this assertion as 


20 


19 This is the only one of these three properties that I’ll prove. To discuss in detail the mathematical 
justification for completeness and closure would take us too far afield into the formalism of quantum mechanics. 
The mathematically inquisitive among you can find proofs in Chap. V, § 6, and Chap. VII of Quantum 
Mechanics by A. Messiah (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1965). 

20 If the eigenvalues are continuous, the Dirac Delta function enters the picture, and the orthogonality 
relation (10.92) reads 


QXq = QXq 
QXq 1 = q'Xq 1 


W # q) 


{Xq 1 Xq) = f>(q' - q)- [continuous eigenvalues] 


For example, the eigenvalues p of the linear momentum operator p are continuous, and the orthonormality 
integral for its eigenfunctions (10.65) is 


J — oc 


This integral is a fairly well-known form of the Dirac Delta function (see Appendix L) f>(p-p'). That is, the 
eigenfunctions of p satisfy the orthonormality relation 

( X P ' | Xp) = HP ~ p')- 


466 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 









X 


Figure 10.2 Graphic evidence that the first two Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of the 
simple harmonic oscillator are orthogonal. The solid curve is the wave function of the 
ground state, the dashed curve is the wave function of the first excited state, and the 
dotted curve is their overlap. 


QX<! = QX<i 

Qx<i' = q'x<i' 


( q ' * q) 


{Xq> \Xq) = o 


orthogonality (10.92) 


To prove that the overlap integral (x y / | Xq) equals zero, we must extract from the 
eigenvalue equations in (10.92) an expression involving this integral. To this end, let’s 
multiply the first of these equations by x* q > and integrate over all space. In Dirac notation, 
the result is 

(xq' I QXq) =q{Xq' \ Xq)■ (10.93) 


We can easily simplify the left-hand side of this equation using the Hermiticity of Q, 
viz., 

{Xq> I QXq) = (QXq' \ Xq) [Hermiticity of Q] (10.94a) 

= (q-Xi -[the-eigenvalue equation (10.85)]—(10.94/?) 

= q'*(Xq' | Xq) [Property II, Table 10.4] (10.94c) 

= q'(xq' | Xq)- [Proclamation 10.2] (10.94 d) 


Pondering Eqs. (10.93) and (10.94), we light on the next step: subtract (10.94 d) 
from (10.93), viz.. 


Sec. 10.6 Real Eigenvalues and Orthonormal Eigenfunctions 467 





(q-q'KXn' | X,) = 0. (10.95) 

But by hypothesis q ± q'. So Eq. (10.95) can hold only if the overlap integral is zero. 

Q. E. D. 

Remembrances of Series Past 


Orthogonality is a property familiar from our study of elementary functions. In Chap. 4, 
while discussing the Fourier series expansion of a function f(x ), 


f(x) = a 0 + Ja„ cos (27m^j + b„ sin ^27rn^ 


n —1 


we noted that the sine and cosine functions satisfy the relations 


fh/2 

( x \ 

/ a;\ 

/ COS 1 

[2t m-J 

sin 27 rm— 

J-L/2 

^ lJ 

V LJ 


(10.96) 


(10.97a) 


fL /2 
/ cos 
J-L/2 


(2 -k n^\ cos ^27T77i^ dx = f sin ^27rn^ sin (2irm^ dx 

J ~ L/2 (10.97 b) 

0 , if m ^ n; 

1 , if m = n. 


Technically, Eqs. (10.97) are called “orthonormality relations,” because they combine 
orthogonality and the normalization condition; the latter is obtained when m = n. 

These trigonometric functions are, of course, related to the Hamiltonian eigenfunc¬ 
tions of the infinite square well [Eq. (7.55)], with real eigenvalues E n = nV/i 2 /{2mL 2 ). 
So Eqs. (10.97) illustrate Proclamation 10.4, expressing the orthogonality of the eigen¬ 
functions of the (Hermitian) Hamiltonian of the infinite square well. 

Aside: Dealing with Degeneracy by Orthogonalization. In the statement of Procla¬ 
mation 10.4,1 deftly slipped in the qualifier “non-degenerate,” because two eigenfunc¬ 
tions that correspond to the same eigenvalue are not necessarily orthogonal. This is 
the case of degenerate eigenvalues: i.e., q = q' in the discussion above. Most eigen¬ 
values of most quantum-mechanical operators are degenerate; so what do we do in 
this case? 

Fortunately, we can always form from the eigenfunctions {*,,} another set of 
eigenfunctions all of whose elements are orthogonal. Each element of the new set 
is a linear combination of the original functions {x,,}. Several procedures exist for 
constructing such sets; we’ll examine one of these, the Gram-Schmidt orthogonal - 
ization procedure, in Volume II. The point to retain is that we can always find a set 
of linearly-independent eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator whose elements are 
orthonormal. 


10.7 CONSEQUENCES OF HERMITICITY II: COMPLETENESS 
AND CLOSURE 

In § 10.6 we proved two properties of the solutions of the eigenvalue equation for a 
Hermitian operator: the eigenvalues are real, and the eigenfunctions are orthogonal. 
In this section, we’ll discuss (but not prove) a slightly more arcane property of these 


468 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 



solutions. Although this property, completeness, is probably unfamiliar to you, it is 
actually one you’ve seen—in the Fourier series (10.96). 

This series illustrates that the set of functions {cos (27rnf) ,sin (27rnf)} is com¬ 
plete in the variable x. The completeness of this set of functions means that any (suitably 
well-behaved) function /( x) that is periodic on the interval [-L/2, L/2] can be expanded 
in the elements of this set. The coefficients of this expansion, a n and b n in (10.96), are 
determined from f(x) as [c.f, Eq. (4.42)], 


1 

rL/2 




ao= L 

’ J-L/2 

f{x) dx 


(10.98a) 

rL/2 

(2ir nj 

\ Ju 

f X' 

27 m— 
k L. 

\ 



/ f(x) COS 

/-L/2 
[L/2 

) dx 

(71=1,2,...) 

(10.98/7) 

/ f(x)sin | 

/-L/2 

) dx. 

(71 = 1,2,...) 

(10.98c) 


In quantum mechanics, completeness is a property of the set {* 9 } of eigenfunctions 
of any Hermitian operator Q. (And it is not restricted to periodic functions.) Complete¬ 
ness of a set of eigenfunctions means that any well-behaved function of the variables on 
which the eigenfunctions depend can be expanded in the set , i.e., there exist coefficients 
I c q such that a function / can be written as the series J2 c qXq 21 

Completeness is an extremely important property, for it is the key to the expansion 
of an arbitrary state function in an arbitrary (complete) set of eigenfunctions— a tactic the 
full value of which will come clear in the next chapter. Here’s how such an expansion 
works mathematically: 22 


21 By “well-behaved” I mean that / must be continuous everywhere; this adjective also usually requires 
that / be finite (but not necessarily normalizable) everywhere. For the mathematical details, see § 7 of Quantum 
Mechanics, Volume I by K. Gottfried (New York: Benjamin, 1966). 

22 Yet another note regarding the trouble caused by pesky continuous eigenvalues: if the spectrum of 
an operator is continuous, then the completeness relation cannot be written as in (10.99), because we cannot 
sum over a continuous index. Instead we must integrate, viz.. 


Q* = Q 



CqXq dq. 


[continuous spectrum] 


For example, the Fourier integral for a free-particle wave function [c.f., Eq. (4.77)] is an expansion of this 
function in the complete set of eigenfunctions of the linear momentum operator: 


Hx,l) = I- x [ 4,(p)e ""' / "] ,,p= ff <*<*>*•(*> 


Note how the time dependence enters the expansion coefficients c p (t) = $(p)e _,w< / /s in this example. 
[Recall that for a free particle, the dispersion relation is u = E/h = hk 2 /(2m).\ If the spectrum includes 
both discrete and continuous eigenvalues, the completeness relation looks even worse: - 


Q' = Q 


V = ^2 CqXq + 

discrete- q 


/ 


continuous q 


c qXq dq< 


This form would be required, for example, to expand a function in the set of eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian 
of the finite symmetric square well. 


Sec. 10.7 Consequences of Hermiticity II: Completeness and Closure 469 



Rule 

Any (physically-admissible) state function can be expanded in the complete set of eigen¬ 
functions of any Hemiitian operator, provided the eigenfunctions satisfy the same boundary 
conditions as the state function: 


eigenfunction 

expansion 


In the parlance of quantum mechanics, the set of eigenfunctions we choose for the 
expansion is called the basis set. The coefficient c q is called the projection of ^ onto 
the basis function \q • We’ll see shortly how to calculate these projections for a particular 
wave function—although you may be able to guess how from Eq. (10.98). 

For example, we expand a wave function of a single particle in one dimension in 
the complete set of eigenfunctions {x f/ M} as 


=Q 

=> >! ' = Y. c " x 'i 


all q 


®(<M) = I>Wx,(*). (lO.lOOo) 

all q 

and that of a single particle in three dimensions in the set {x<?( r )} as 

g>(i-,t) = £c,(tk,(r)- (10.100/;) 

all q 

All such expansions have a common form: 

wave \ ( projection on A ( eigenfunction of 

function j 2s l the eigenfunction J ^ Hemiitian operator 

eigenfunctions 

Notice that the state function depends on time, so the expansion coefficients c q in 
(10.99) perforce depend on t. Note also that all eigenfunctions of Q must be included in 
these expansions. This means, in principle, that the sum in Eqs. (10.100) will contain 
an infinite number of terms. To be sure, for a particular state, some of the expansion 
coefficients c q may happen to be zero—if, as in Example 10.12 below, the function we are 
expanding has a symmetry property not shared by the eigenfunctions {xj. Nevertheless, 
you should memorize the following rule: 


(10.100c) 


// 


Example 10.12. The Eigenfunctions of the SHO Hamiltonian 

The Hamiltonian of the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator, H = p 2 /(2m) + rruvlx 2 /2, 
is Hermitian. So the set of its eigenfunctions, {ip„(x)} where n = 0, 1, 2, .... is complete 
in the variable x and can be used as the basis set in an expansion of any well-behaved 
function of x that is spatially localized. The spectrum of the SHO Hamiltonian consists 
solely of discrete energies E„ = (n + ±) fiwo, and all of the corresponding eigenfunctions 
satisfy the boundary conditions ip„ (re) —> 0 as re —» ±oo. 


Rule 

In general do not omit any eigenfunctions from a complete set expansion. 


470 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 





Because this Hamiltonian is Hermitian, we can expand any physically-admissible 
wave function (that satisfies these boundary conditions) in the set of its eigenfunc¬ 

tions. According to Eq. (10.100a), the expansion of a function ^(a;,/) in this basis looks 
like 


= ^c„(<)^„(z). (10.101) 

n=0 

We implemented just such an expansion for a non-stationary state of the SHO in Example 9.6: 
the state represented by [Eq. (9.129a)] 

#(*,«) = (j) 1/1 e-0 2 ’ 2 ** [ e —o«/2 + j2p xe -^°</*] (10.102a) 

= -j=Mx)e~ iEot/tl + i{x)e~ iElt/h . (10.102/?) 

The second line in Eq. (10.102) is the expansion of ty{x } t) in the complete set of SHO 
eigenfunctions. [The state function (10.102a) was so simple that we could determine the 
coefficients in (10.102/?) by inspection; later in this section we’ll derive a straightforward 
procedure for calculating these coefficients when this simple gambit fails.] Note that for 
this particular state function, all but two of the expansion coefficients are zero. 

We can exploit the completeness of the eigenfunctions {^„(a;)} to expand more 
complicated SHO wave functions, such as the (initial) wave packet 

^(x,0) = -^=-x 2 e~ x2/(2a2) . (10.103a) 

V 27T a 

This particular function has even parity, so although its expansion (10.101) does contain an 
infinite number of terms, the coefficients c n (t) for all odd n must be zero. [Only even-parity 
functions can appear in the expansion of an even function; just one odd-parity function on 
the right-hand side of (10.103/?) would befoul the purity of the parity of 'St(x,t).] So for 
this state, the complete set expansion becomes 

OC 

= y s Cn(t)ijtn{x). [even-parity ty] (10.103/?) 

ii=0 

(oven) 

Aside: On the Choice of a Complete Set for Expansion. A remarkable feature 
of completeness is its versatility: the Hermitian operator that defines the basis set 
in which we expand a state function need not have anything to do with the system 
whose state function we expand. For example, we could use the compete set of SHO 
eigenfunctions to expand a state function of some other system—say, a stationary- 
state wave function of the symmetric finite square well (§ 8.7-8.8), or a free-parlicle 
wave packet such as the Lorentzian 

*(3,0) = - ° . . (10.104a) 

7T X 2 + a 2 

The form of the expansion of (10.104a) is 

(5525)- E -<» (-WESi.) <”■“» 

nigon functions 

This feature of completeness isn’t magic; completeness is a mathematical property of 
eigenfunctions, not tied to the systems whose states they may represent. 


Sec. 10.7 Consequences of Hermiticity II: Completeness and Closure 471 


Question 10-22 

Could we expand a wave function of the asymmetric finite square well in the set of eigen¬ 
functions of the SHO Hamiltonian? Why or why not? How about a wave function of the 
infinite square well? 


A Familiar Analogue 

Does completeness seem remote, abstract, too mathematical to visualize? Would you 
like a picture ? In discussing orthogonality (§ 10.6), I noted an analogy between the 
mathematics of eigenfunctions and that of vectors. Look at Fig. 10.3, where a vector [a 
directed line segment in geometrical space (5i 3 )] is expanded in the set of unit vectors 
{e ;CJ e y ,e 2 }. Any (continuous) directed line segment V can be so expanded, 

V = c x e x + c y e y + c z e z , (10.105) 

because the set {e XJ e yi e z } is complete. These three unit vectors, in fact, comprise a 
basis for the expansion of the arbitrary vector V. The * expansion coefficients c xt c y , 
and c z are called the components of V and are determined as projections of this vector 
on the unit vectors, the elements of the complete set: 

c x = e x \ (10.106a) 

c y = e y \ 00.106 b) 

c z — e z - V. (10.106c) 

This analogy is the origin of the use of the word “projection” for the expansion coef¬ 
ficients c q (t) in the expansion of # in the complete set {x<J» Eq. (10.99). Drawing 

further on this analogy, physicists sometimes call these coefficients the components of 
'T on the eigenfunctions {xr,}- 23 



Figure 10.3 A vector and its components 
on the complete set of axes of a Cartesian 
(recta ngular) coordi nate system. 


23 There is more here than meets the eye. As I have remarked before, quantum states can be represented 
by “vectors" in an abstract “linear vector space” called Hilbert space. Hilbert space is not a three-dimensional 
space like the one we live in, but the analogy between the two provides a powerful geometrical interpretation 
of quantum mechanics. For a readable introduction to this viewpoint, see § 4.4 of Introductory Quantum 
Mechanics by R. L. Liboff (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1980). For the whole story, see Principles of 
Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed. by P. A. M. Dirac (Cambridge: Oxford University Press, 1970). 


472 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 





Determination of the Expansion Coefficients 

In the vector analogy to the eigenfunction expansion (10.99), the coefficients c x , c y , 
and c z are determined from V and from the elements of the basis set in which the vector 
was expanded. In the Fourier series analogy (10.98), the coefficients a n and b u were 
determined from f(x ) and from the elements of the set {cos ( 2nnf ) ,sin (27rn^)}. So 
it should come as no surprise that the coefficients c q {t) in the expansion of $ in {x 9 } 
are determined from the state function and the eigenfunctions in this set (see Table 10.8). 
In fact, the equation for these coefficients, which we’ll now derive, bears a suggestive 
similarity to those for the components of a vector and for the Fourier coefficients. 

TABLE 10.8 THREE EXPANSIONS: AN ANALOGY. 



Expand in 

Components 

Ref. 

vector 

{e x ,e v ,e z } 

c Xt Cy, c z 

(10.105) 

periodic function 

{cos ( 27 m,sin ( 27 ™^)} 

®»i j bn 

(10.96) 

state function 

(X,} 

c qif) 

(10.99) 


To derive from the expansion Ylq c qXq an expression for the coefficient c q we 
must isolate this coefficient. We can do so by exploiting what we know about the 
eigenfunctions in this expansion: they are orthonormal, i.e ., 

(*,' | X„> = (10.107) 

How can we make an orthogonality integral appear in the eigenfunction expansion? 
Easy: we first multiply the expansion (on the left) by x * q > : 

(IOI08 > 

all q 


We then integrate both sides of Eq. (10.108) over all space, and voila! 

J X* q >^dv = Y^c q J Xq'Xqdv. (10.109a) 

all space ^ all space 

In Dirac notation Eq. (10.109a) is 

(X,'|*) = E C «(VU,>. (10.1096) 

all q 


Now, the overlap integrals on the right-hand side are equal to Kronecker delta functions 
8q, q '- B_ut each of these Kronecker delta functions eq uals zero except for 8 q _ q = 1 . So 
this beast kills all terms in the sum over q except q = q\ thereby isolating the coefficient 
Cq 1 = (Xq' I ^)- Dropping the unnecessary prime on the eigenvalue, we can write our 
result for the projection of on x q as 

9w 



projection of # of Xq = c q = (x q | 


( 10 . 110 ) 


Sec. 10.7 Consequences of Hermiticity II: Completeness and Closure 473 





Note that this result isn’t restricted to wave functions: we can apply it to any function 
f(x) that obeys the same boundary conditions as the eigenfunctions {x<?} : > c q = 

{Xq I />• 

To illustrate this important result, here are the coefficients in the expansions in 
Eqs. (10.100) of one- and three-dimensional wave functions: 


c q(t) — 

Cq{t) = 


l 


X*(x)^{x t t) dx 


—oo 

/•OO /*7T n 2 tt 

I / / 

0 Jo Jo 


(10.111a) 

(10.1116) 


where in (10.1116) the volume element in spherical coordinates is dv = r 2 dr sin Odd dip. 


Question 10-23 

Derive Eq. (10.1026) from Eq. (10.102a) using the general relationship (10.110). 


To fully appreciate the awesome niftiness of Eq. (10.110) we’ll have to wait un¬ 
til Chap. 12, where we’ll use it to solve the time-dependent Schrodinger equation for 
non-stationary states. Since that chapter, which is entirely devoted to eigenfunction 
expansions, is filled with applications of this procedure, I’ll eschew further examples 
here. We have, after all, a bit more to cover in our sojourn through the mathematics of 
Hermitian operators. 


Closure 


The final property of the eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator is the one of the least 
obvious relevance: closure. Closure is intimately related to the other properties we’ve 
examined, orthogonality and completeness (see Pblm. 10.5), but it has a very odd form. 
One viewpoint on the closure relation is that it’s a way to represent the Dirac Delta 
function 6(x - x') in terms of the eigenfunctions of an operator Q: 


Xq(x)x q (x') = S(x - x') 

all q 


closure 


( 10 . 112 ) 


Notice carefully that in each term in the sum in (10.112), the eigenvalue q appears twice: 
once as a label on the eigenfunction x with argument x and a second time on the same 
eigenfunction but with the argument x 1 . 


Question 10-24 

The Dirac Delta function 8(x - x') acts in an integral f^ xi 8(x - x')f(x')dx' to “pluck 
out” the value f(x) (see Appendix L). Prove that 



Xq(x)x q (x)f{x)dx = f(x). 


We won’t often use the closure relation. But this property is important in more advanced 
treatments of quantum theory, so I include it for (ahem) completeness. 


474 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




Where’s the Physics? 

The major results of this chapter are the properties we’ve been discussing in the past 
two sections. They are summarized in Table 10.9, where I have also included the results 
for continuous eigenvalues so you’ll have them if you need them. (If you haven’t been 
reading the footnotes, ignore this column.) Before leaving these properties, which you 
should memorize , I must stress one point. 

Way back in Chap. 3, Postulate I declared that any quantum state could be rep¬ 
resented by a wave function \I>(a;,£). It is extremely important to appreciate that the 
collection of coefficients {<:,,(£)} in the expansion of a state function in any complete set 
I is merely an alternate way to represent this physical state. These coefficients contain 
precisely the same physical information as the state function. 

The wave function ^{x,t) highlights the observable position, i.e ., this function— 
the position probability amplitude —is especially well-suited to investigating probabilities, 
average values, and uncertainties of the observable x. Similarly, the set (c 9 (<)} highlights 
properties of the system related to the observable Q. 

For example, in Chap. 4, we first encountered the notion of multiple representations 
of a quantum state. There we developed the momentum-space representation of a state, its 
momentum probability amplitude $(p). In that Chapter, I emphasized that 4>(p) contained 
no more or less physical information than the state function in the position representation, 
V(x, t). Rather, the momentum-space function is just a way to represent that information 
that is particularly convenient for studying the momentum properties of the particle. 

In fact, as we’ll see in Chap. 13, the coefficient c q (t) = (x,, | \P) is a “probability 
amplitude for the observable Q," just as ^ (rc, i) is a probability amplitude for position. 
Thus we have the following alternative ways of representing the physical information 
about the particle in a particular quantum state: 


Since there are a very large number of observables Q for any system, there are a 
huge number of alternative representations of that information. The three most important 
are the position, momentum, and energy representations. The latter will be introduced 
in Chap. 12. 

10.8 FINAL THOUGHTS—AND A FINAL EXAMPLE: THE PARITY 
OPERATOR 

To review the many mathematical machinations I’ve introduced in this Chapter, I want 
to explore further the properties of a particularly important operator: ft . 24 We defined 
the parity operator in Eq. (10.68) by its action on an arbitrary function, 

2, The parity operator is peculiar in that, unlike p or fi, it cannot be expressed as a function of x and p. 
Instead, the parity operator is one of a class of symmetry operators. Symmetry operators play an important role 
in quantum mechanics when this theory is formulated in terms of a branch of advanced mathematics called 
“group theory.” (Other symmetry operators include translation, reflection and rotation; we’ll study rotation 
operators in Volume II.) Nevertheless, the parity of a quantum state can be measured in the laboratory; in fact, 
the Chinese-American physicists T-D Lee and C. N. Yang shared the Nobel Prize in 1957 for demonstrating that 
parity is not conserved in all microscopic interactions (see § 11.9 for the saga of the fall of parity conservation). 


{c,W;all q} 

1 

—* ^(x,t) 

1 

I 

information about Q 

I 

information about x 



Sec. 10.8 Final Thoughts—and a Final Example: The Parity Operator 475 




TABLE 10.9 PROPERTIES OF THE EIGENFUNCTIONS AND EIGENVALUES 
OF A HERMITIAN OPERATOR Q. 



Discrete Spectrum 

Continuous Spectrum 

eigenvalues 

q n real 

q real 

orlhonormality 

(\y | Xq) = tq'.q 

(\y | Xq) = W - fl) 

completeness 

* = E C ^q 

all q 

* = f CqXq dq 

all q 

projection of ^ 

X 

II 

i 5 

II 

•a 

•6 

closure 

2 = 6 (- t ' _ x ’) 
all q 

f Xq (x' )Xq (■'»'’) dq = 6(x’ - x) 

all q 


n f(x) = /(-*), 


(10.113) 


and noted two of its eigenvalue equations in Eqs. (10.69), 


f[f(x) = 


+f(x) 

-f(x) 


if f(x) is even 
if f(x) is odd 


(10.114) 


But my remarks on parity thus far have left unanswered a host of questions: are 
±1 the only eigenvalues of this operator? Is n a valid quantum-mechanical operator, 
i.e., is it Hermitian? And what about a symmetric potential allows the eigenfunctions of 
its Hamiltonian to have definite parity, i.e ., to be simultaneously eigenfunctions of the 
parity operator? We are now in a position to answer these questions. 


Question 10-25 

The parity operator in three dimensions inverts a vector r through the origin, as 

n/(r) = /(-r). (10.115) 


In rectangular (Cartesian) coordinates, the effect of this operator is 

n/(*,y, *) = /(-*.-».-*)■ (10.116) 

What is the effect of fl in spherical coordinates, i.e., what is n/(r,#,</>)? 


Like most good quantum-mechanical operators, fl is linear: 

n[ci/,(:c) + c 2 h(x)] = Ci/i(-x) + c 2 / 2 (-x) (10.117a) 

= c 1 n/ 1 (a) + c s n/ 2 (s). (10.117ft) 

And, like all good quantum-mechanical operators, it is Hermitian. The proof of the latter 
property is worth contemplating, for it illustrates yet another important problem-solving 
strategy. 


Example 10.13. Hermiticity of the Parity Operator 

This is one proof that is best not carried out in Dirac notation. The issue at hand is the 
question 


^(®,t)[fl^ 2 (a:,0]^ = J [n*i (x t t)Yv 2 {x,t)dx. 


( 10 . 118 ) 


476 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 




Let's go to work on the left-hand side of (10.H8), 


/: 


\p J (x, t)fl^ 2 ( :K i 0 d x 


= r 

7-00 


t)^ 2 (-x,t) dx. 


(10.119) 


To prove (or disprove) Hermiticity we a form that 

of (10.119) into a form in whic P hQW tQ effect th i s change? 

eontains «, ( -M) ( and^(^^ variable of integration from * » -* ( «* very 

careful with the limits of integration when we do so). 

( 10 . 120 a) 
( 10 . 120 /?) 


r x XT , A j „_ / \K(-x,t)^2(3)0d( -a; ) 

„ _„ «.»,»....» 


j' ..;n,oin.h ')* ■ /* in».(..or«*-‘> fc 


( 10 . 121 ) 


which proves quite handily that ft is Hennitian. 


\Y11 Ivli -- 

So even though ft cannot a^ouU^emfofaHemitianoperator: 

- W ° W) 3 C ° mP,e,e Se ‘ ^ ^ ^ 

that satisfy closure. 

Question 10-26 

What is the adjoint of the parity operator. 

- --—-*«■- M ~ *** 

n 2 = i- 

Prove this property. 

MomM. ond eigenlmctlans or.»« Mr W»"“o' 

„ -V. «. *— *• -® 

ftXeW = «,(*). , u , . , 

. . nur first stab at solving (10.122) might be to let 

where q, the eigenvalue must be real. O iooks unpromis i n g: 

ft act on the eigenfunctton. At first glance, ^ 

__Xr/( at) = qXnW- _ 

v* neot.. «»•«•« “* *» * “»» 

. „ .rSffi! 5 » - - or «• - *'<■ 

viz., » , . (10.124a) 

X,W = (inxeW- 

Final Though,s-and a Final Example: The Parity Operator 477 


Sec. 10.8 



We now use the eigenvalue equation (10.122) 
(10.124«), obtaining 


to let ft act on the right-hand side of 


Xq{x) - q X q {x). (10.124b) 

This means that q 2 = 1, which, since q must be real, means that q = ±1. 
i >0 the parity operator has only two, discrete eigenvalues : 25 

nx±i(s) = ±lx±i(s), (io 124c) 

'IZZI Wi ‘ h Eq ' ( '°- 69) - Erg0> a " yfmC,i0 " ** b e 'S en fimclion oft is either 

N°te carefully that this property of the eigenfunctions of the parity operator is 
a consequence of the definition of that operator-al,hough the glib way I have r e e " d 
to evem and odd-parity functions” earlier in this book may hfve led'you mthTnk 0 
Rather, it is a consequence of the Henniticity of the parity operator Note also that 
the above argument does not imply that all functions are eigenfunctions of ft Them is 
no reason why functions g(x) cannot exist such that ftp(.r) ^ ± ff ( T ). indeed h 

Z" SUCh fUnC,i0nS in 0Ur S,Udy ° f one " c *' m ensional systems' 

™.- s rxs ssrsrs “—-**—— 

(x +1 I X-i) = 0. (10.125) 

° U f e S6t ° f eigenfUnCti ° nS b + LX-i} means that any 
junction can he wntten as the sum of an even function and an odd function , 

f(x) — cj x + i (a;) + C 2 X-i(a;). [for arbitrary f(x)] (10.126) 

in a variety ° f contexts ° ther than quamum physics * s ° k,s 

Question 10-28 

tlTunf ^noTanf Pari r' T* ‘ hiS fUnC,ion and «* eigenfunctions 
X+1 ^{ d X ~' {x > ,n (,a,26 > are normalized. What must be the values of the exoansinn 

teLsT/ix). 3nd C2? DenVe eXPreSSi ° nS f ° r thC eigenfunctions X + i(z) and *_ l( ,) in 

Parity and the Hamiltonian 

! h n “ apS ' 8 and , 9 ’ we scrutinized several one-dimensional symmetric potentials-notine 

nc,ions Sr WaVe / UnCti0nS ^ defini,e pari1 ^ «*lr Hamihonian g m 
functionsfe(x) are eigenfunctions of n. This situation is special- as we have seen 

the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of systems with asymmetric potentials such as the half’ 

infinite hnear potential and the asymmetric square well, are neither evel nor odd 

su PP 01ted ^ese observations with the proof of Proclamation 9 2 which 
stated that rte hound-state eigenfunctions of a symmetric potential havT^part 

eigenvalue equation (10.122) forTn h analytic U !brm onhese C fu faC ‘’ itS im P ossible *° solve the 
eigenvalue equation for the simple harmonic oscilhmrt h unc,, ° ns we could, say. the Hamiltonian 
To each eigenvalue of ft , Ji ' oscillator) because of the peculiar nature of the parity operator 

“infinite-fold degenerate ” corrcs P onds a " number of eigenfunctions ; so the eigenvalues of ft arc 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics 



That proof appealed directly to the TISE for a symmetric Hamiltonian. But the reasons 
for this result are deeper even than the Schrodinger equation; they strike to the very 
essence of the nature of the system itself. To show you why, I want to reconsider this 
property from an operator viewpoint. In particular, I want to explore the commutation 
relation of the Hamiltonian and the parity operator—and its implications. To this end, 
we’ll consider in succession the two terms in 7f, beginning with the potential operator. 

One way to express the symmetry (under inversion) of a symmetric potential is in 
terms of the function V(x), i.e ., 


V(—x) = V(x). (10.127a) 

How could we express this essential feature of the system as an operator equation ? Well, 
the function V(x) is related to the potential operator , one of the two operators in the 
system Hamiltonian (see Chap. 5). In the position representation, V is the mathematical 
instruction: multiply by the function V(x). 

The statement (10.127a) of the symmetry of the potential involves an inversion of 
x through the origin, so it’s not surprising that its operator expression involves the parity 
operator. Equation (10.127a) shows us that this operator commutes with V : since V(x) 
is symmetric, we can interchange V and n at will, i.e., 26 

flV = V'fl => [n,V] =0. [for a symmetric potential] (10.1276) 

The commutator relation (10.1276) expresses the symmetry of the system in the operator 
viewpoint. But this is only half of the story: to see if the Hamiltonian commutes with 
ft, we must consider next the kinetic energy operator. 

Example 10.14. The Parity Operator and the Kinetic Energy Operator 

Our demonstration that the parity operator commutes with a symmetric potential operator 
may lead you to wonder if FI commutes with the kinetic energy operator. The form of this 
operator, T = p 2 /(2m), suggests that we back up one step and ask whether fl commutes 
with p. In one dimension, p = —ihd/dx, and it’s not hard to see that the order of operation 
of these operators is important. Since n leaves the constant factor — ih unchanged, we have 


tlpf(x)= ihf [ df } x ) 
ax 

(10.128a) 

= —ih 

[ df(x)] 
dx 

(10.1286) 

= -pflf{x). 

(10.128c) 

So the operators ft and p don’t commute, i.e. 

» 


Up = —pfl. 

(10.128d) 


But T entails two successive applications of p. From the form of Eq. (10.128</), you 
might guess that the form of T causes this operator to commute with EL Let’s see: 


26 Be careful when working with operator equations such as (10.127 by, ’tis safest to let them act on an 
arbitrary function, as 


fl Vf{x) = Vflf(x). 

Be sure you understand why the left-hand side of this equation is V(—x)f(—x) instead of V r (— x)f(x). 

Sec. 10.8 Final Thoughts—and a Final Example: The Parity Operator 479 



(10.129a) 


= -2~pftp (10.1296) 

= -i-ppfl (10.129c) 

2m 

= fn. (10.129rf) 

You were right: fl and T do commute: 

[n,f]=0. (10.129e) 


We can now deduce the desired commutation relation for fl and the Hamiltonian 
of a system with a symmetric potential. Combining the result of Example 10.13 with 
Eq. (10.127/?), we find 



Question 10-29 

Prove that if V^-a;) 7 ^ K(x), then [7/, ft] ^ 0. 

The central question of this section concerns the consequences of this commutation 
relation for the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian. Let’s act on such an eigenfunction 
with the operator equation (10.130): 

fin^ E (x) = nn4> E (x). ( 10 . 131 ) 

The presence of HII'iJje(x) on the right-hand side of (10.131) leads us to wonder: might 
the function fhpE{%) be an eigenfunction of HI To find out, look at the left-hand side 
of this equation. Using the TISE to simplify this side, we get 

= ilEf E (x) = E [ftiM*)] . (10.132) 

with which we can write Eq. (10.131) as 

ii. [n^ E (®)] = e [ny» B (ao]. ( 10 . 133 ) 

—Egad \ Both functions ipE{x)and flip e (®-)- we eigenfunctions of the operator H, 
with the same eigenvalue. But we know (from Proclamation 9.1, § 9.4) that the (bound- 
state) eigenvalues of a one-dimensional, single-particle system are non-degenerate. Con¬ 
sequently, these two functions must be proportional to one another. Using q as the 
constant of proportionality, we can write 

ft iI>e(x) = (10.134) 

480 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 





But this is just the eigenvalue equation of the parity operator, Eq. (10.124), and the 
proportionality constants are just the eigenvalues q = ± 1. 

This argument proves that the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of a symmetric potential 
are simultaneous eigenfunctions of two operators, II and H: 27 

— EiPe{%) Hamiltonian eigenvalue equation (10.135#) 

ft^(x) = ±^e(£). parity eigenvalue equation (10.1356) 

This alternate proof of Proclamation 9.2 lays bare the essence of why stationary- 
state wave functions of a symmetric Hamiltonian have definite parity. We have seen 
that this property is an inevitable consequence of the fact that a symmetric Hamiltonian 
commutes with the parity operator. This example hints at a profound connection between 
the commutation relations satisfied by a pair of operators and the eigenfunctions of 
those operators. In the next chapter, we’ll explore this relationship further, and later, in 
Part IV, we’ll discover the remarkable implications of this connection for measurements 
on microscopic systems. 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 

Operators 

Don’t limit your reading to my treatment of the mathematics and physics of operators. 
Nearly every quantum mechanics text written in the last 30 years has a chapter or so on 
this material; some of them are very good. One I particularly like is 

1. Feynman, R. P., R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics: Volume 
III (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1970). 

The entirety of Feynman’s treatment of quantum physics is well worth your attention. 
Chap. 20 deals with operators and ranges over most of the material covered in more 
conventional texts. 

A particularly excellent treatment of the mathematics of quantum mechanical op¬ 
erators is 

2. Jordan, T. F., Linear Operators in Quantum Mechanics , (New York: Wiley, 1969). 
Jordan’s text emphasizes the mathematical foundations of quantum theory, but I think 
most of you will find it accessible and enlightening. 

Eigenvalue Equations and Completeness 

Many of the pivotal equations in quantum theory are eigenvalue equations. Eigenvalue 
equations and their solutions are a subject in themselves. Two fine sources for background 
reading on this (and related mathematical topics) are 

3. Jackson, J. D., Mathematics for Quantum Mechanics (New York: W. A. Benjamin, 1962). 

4. Hylleraas, E. A., Mathematical and Theoretical Physics: Volume I, (New York: Wiley, 
1970). For specific information on eigenvalue equations from a mathematical viewpoint, 
see Chap. 25. 

27 You may be wondering why I didn’t label these eigenfunctions with both eigenvalues, E and ±1. 
Doing so isn’t wrong, but neither is it necessary. If we know the energy, we can deduce the parity of the 
function, so the eigenvalue ±1 is redundant. Note that the argument doesn’t go the other way: knowledge of 
the parity of a particular Hamiltonian eigenfunction certainly does not enable us to deduce its energy. 


Annotated Selected Readings 481 



The subject of completeness is fraught with subtleties. But complete sets of func¬ 
tions are at the heart of the mathematics of quantum physics, so such matters are critical. 
Regrettably, most serious treatments of this topic are at a very advanced level. The best 
treatment I know of is in 

5. Cushing, J. T., Applied Analytical Mathematics for Physical Scientists (New York: Wiley, 
1975). Chap. 4. 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 

“ ... at times 
the intention is puzzling 
the discontinuities inexplicable.” 

—The Endless Short Story 
by Ronald Sukenick 


I’ve saved several nifty problems on operators for Chap. 11, which concludes the story 
begun here. Unfortunately, most of the problems in this chapter are a bit dry and 
“exercise-y.” Sad to tell, to be a quantum physicist you must be a good operator 
mechanic , and that means lots of practice . Like practicing a musical instrument, prac¬ 
ticing quantum mechanics is sometimes a little tedious, but nearly always rewarding. 

Exercises 

( 10.1 Operators: Short-Answer Questions for Review 

[a] If A represents an observable in quantum mechanics, what condition must it satisfy (be 
explicit)? 

[b] Discuss carefully the meaning and consequences of the statement “a quantum system is 
in an eigenstate of A." 

[c] Write down the eigenvalue equation for A. What are the consequences for the solutions 
of this equation if A is Hermitian? 

[d] Suppose you were given the classical expression for an observable Q = Q(x,p). How 
would you form the quantum-mechanical operator that represents this observable? 

[e] If (A) is equal to one of the eigenvalues of A, is the system necessarily in an eigenstate 
of A? Why or why not? 

10.2 Coping with Operators: I 

Consider the following operators: 

1. A\ x which differentiates once with respect to x and multiplies the result by y/x, i.e., 

AJ{x) = y/x-^f(x). 

2 . M, which inverts the function it acts on. 

_3_A 3 ,whichtranslatesthefunctionitactsonbya,/.c.,_ 

Kf( x ) = f( x + «)• 


4. A 4 = 8d?/dx 2 . 

5. As = -d'fdx 4 4- 6. 

Which of these operators is linear? Which is Hermitian? Justify your answers. 


482 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 



10.3 Coping with Operators II 

Consider the operators in Exercise 10.2 and the additional operators: 

1. A g , which squares the first derivative with respect to x of the function it acts on, i.e.. 


Aof(x) 



2. A 7 , which averages the function it acts on over an interval of magnitude L centered on 

x = 0. 

Which of these operators could, in principle, represent an observable in quantum mechanics? 
Fully justify your answer. 

10.4 Operators in Quantum Mechanics 

[a] Let Q] and Q 2 be Hermitian Operators. Prove that the operator Q 3 = ijQiiOa] is 
Hermitian. 

Hint: Use Dirac notation and the Hermiticity of Q\ and Q 2 . 

[b] What can you conclude from part [a] about the expectation value of Q 3 1 

[c] What is the adjoint of Q 3 1 

[dj Suppose Q 3 , the operator defined in [a], is a non-zero operator. Consider the second 
operator Qa = Q 1 Q 2 . Is Qa Hermitian? Prove your answer, preferably by examining 
the adjoint of Qa- 

[e] Suppose Q\ is the Hamiltonian of a conservative system, 


Qi = H = T + V{x). 


Suppose further that Q 2 = p. Determine Q 3 , as defined in part [a]. 

Hint: Be careful; Q 3 is non-zero. 

10.5 Are you positive? Are you definite? 

A Hermitian Operator is said to be positive-definite if its expectation value is positive for 
any state function , i.e.. 


(Q) = (¥ | Q | ¥) > 0. (all tf) 

[a] Prove that the eigenvalues of a positive-definite operator are positive, real numbers. 

[b] Which of the operators x 2 and p 2 are positive-definite? Prove your answer. 

10.6 Working with Dirac Notation 

Write the following integrals in full integral form and in Dirac braket notation: 

[a] the expectation value in spherical coordinates of the energy of a three-dimensional system 
with wave function ^(r, £); 

[b] the matrix element (^1 | Q | ^ 2 ), where the operator Q is defined in terms of a 
two-variable function K(x,x > ) as 


Qf(x) 



K(x,x)f(x)dx. 


10.7 Anti-Hermiticity 

Just as some operators are anti-linear, others are anti-Hermitian. Although such operators 
play little role in quantum theory, they do provide practice with operator mathematics. An 
anti-Herniitian operator is one that satisfies 

( | Aty 2 ) = - ( A<L i | ^ 2 )--anti=Hermitian operator— 

[a] What is the adjoint of an anti-Hermitian operator? 

[b] Is the expectation value of an anti-Hermitian operator real, complex, or imaginary? Prove 
your answer. 

[cl Under what conditions on the number c is the operator A = cl anti-Hermitian? 

[d] Prove that A — d/dx is anti-Hermitian. 


Exercises and Problems 483 



[e] Is [x,p] anti-Hermitian? Why or why not? 
10.8 fcigenvalue Equations 

Consider a system with the Hamiltonian 



[a] Is ii Hermitian? 2 

[b] Determine whether or not the function f(x) = Axe~ x /2 is an eigenfunction of H and, 
if so, determine its eigenvalue. 

[c] Normalize f(x) by determining the value of the constant A. 

[d] Conjure a system with this Hamiltonian. What state does f(x) represent? 


Problems 

10.1 The Exponential Operator I 

The exponential operator of Example 10.3 affords a wonderful example for practicing operator 
manipulations, because for this operator most such manipulations are pretty straightforward. 
In this problem and the next, we’ll consider various aspects of operators of the form e Ql , 
where Q is Hermitian. 

[a] Use the series expansions of two such operators, e Qlt and e Qa ‘, to prove that in general 

e Qit e Q2 l ^ e Q2i e Qif (10.1.1) 

[b] Under what conditions (if any) on Qi and Q 2 is 

e Qi< e Q2f L e (Qi+<?2)i (10.1.2) 


10.2 The Exponential Operator II: The Derivative 

The exponential operator you worked with in Pblm. 10.1 is also useful for practicing with 
operator derivatives. Try your hand at the following exercises: 

[a] Determine whether the operators Q and e Qt commute. 

[b] Now, derive an expression for the operator de® 1 /dt, assuming that Q does not explicitly 
depend on t. 

[c] Validate or refute the following proposition: 

d i (Q [ + Q 2 ) e <?i> e ^'. (10.2.1) 

dt 

[d] Consider a Hermitian operator that explicitly depends on t. Validate or refute the 
following proposition 

±L e Q(t) L dQ{t) c Q(t) (10.2.2) 

dt dt 

10.3 The Parity Operator 

Prove that the anti-commutator of the parity operator and the linear momentum operator is 
zero, i.e., 

[n,p] + = o. 

10.4 Operators and Eigenfunctions 

A particle of mass m is in the ground state of a finite symmetric square well of width L. 

[a] What is the expectation value of p for this state? 

[b] Show that the Hamiltonian eigenfunction of this state is not an eigenfunction of p. 

[c] Write the Hamiltonian eigenfunction as a linear combination of eigenfunctions of p and 
evaluate the ratio of the coefficients in your expansion. Discuss your results physically, 
commenting on their implications for the probability current density in this state. 


484 Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 



[d] Is the Hamiltonian eigenfunction also an eigenfunction of the kinetic-energy operator T? 
Justify your answer. 

Hint: Consider the TISE for ip\(x). 

[e] Is the linear momentum in this state sharp? Why or why not? 

[f] Answer parts [dj and [e] for the ground state of the infinite square well. 

10.5 An Incomplete Treatment of Completeness 

In § 10.7 we discussed the mathematical property called completeness. There we learned that 
the set of eigenfunctions {xg(®)} of an Hennitian operator Q is complete; i.e., any (suitably 
well-behaved) function f(x) can be expanded in this set [c.f, Eq. (10.99)], as 


f( x ) = 

all q 


The coefficients in this expansion are evaluated a la Eq. (10.110) as 

c, = f°° X* q ( x )f(x')dx'. 

J — OC 


(10.5.1) 


(10.5.2) 


Equation (10.5.1) is useful in practice once we know that a given set of functions is complete, 
but it’s awkward if we want to determine whether a particular set of functions is complete. 
For that purpose, we’d prefer a relationship expressed entirely in terms of the eigenfunctions , 
not in terms of a nameless “arbitrary function.” Happily, we can derive just such a relationship 
by inserting Eq. (10.5.2) into the expansion (10.5.1), to wit: 

POO 

f( x ) = Xq( x )Xq( x )f{x) dx. (10.5.3) 

all qd-OC 


Now, since f(x) is arbitrary, Eq. (10.5.3) can hold if and only if the eigenfunctions {xg(x)} 
satisfy the closure relationship (10.112), 

(*)**(*') = 8(x - X ), (10.5.4) 

all q 


where fi(x — x‘) is the Dirac Delta function. So one irny to check completeness of a set of 
functions is to see if they satisfy Eq. (10.5.4). 

Prove that the set of eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian of a simple harmonic oscillator 
is complete, by showing that they satisfy (10.5.4). 

Hint: First, use the integral 



e -a 2 x 2 +bx 


dx = 



[for Re a 2 > 0] 


(10.5.5) 


to show that the normalized spatial functions for the SHO can be represented as definite 
integrals, viz.. 


iM®) 


tK Y 1/4 r t“ dt 

2y(2^7m!) \ J J_ x 


(10.5.6) 


10.6 A Strange Way to Represent Operators 

Some operators are very complicated in their effect on functions. Perhaps the most extreme 
examples are the non-local operators , whose action on a function entails integrating the 
function over all space. 

Any operator A, whether local or non-local, can be written as an integral over the 
product of the function it acts on and a two-variable function called the kernel. This is called 
the integral representation of A and looks like 


Exercises and Problems 485 




where I<(x,x') is the kernel of A. We have seen one example of an integral representation 
of an operator: the Fourier integral relations (4.48) and (4.49) are integral representations 
of the operators that determine the Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transforms of the 
functions on which they act. 

[a] What is the kernel of the operator that creates the Fourier transform of a (normalized) 
function /(®)? 

[b] What is the kernel in the integral representation of the unit operator i? 

[c] Show that the integral representation of the linear momentum operator (for a one¬ 
dimensional system) is ih-fp6(x - x'). 

10.7 The Time Reversal Operator 

In the quantum theory of scattering of elementary particles, an important role is played by 
a most peculiar operator. The time reversal operator T is akin to the parity operator of 
§ 10.8 in that it acts on the variables in coordinate- and momentum-space wave functions. 
In particular, this operator changes x into +.r and p into —p; these changes correspond to a 
“time reversal” t —» —t\ 


f : [ X ^ X . (10.7.1) 

l P~» -P 

In high-energy physics, an important property of scattering processes is invariance of the 
physical properties of a system under time-reversal. The effect of T on a state function is to 
produce a function that represents the same state evolving backward in time. For example, 
the mean value of the linear momentum in a “time reversed” state Td' is 

(f$ | p | T tf) = -(V | p | *)• (10.7.2) 

[a] Prove that the effect of T on the state function of a system ^(x,t) is 

fV{x,t) = V*(x,t). (10.7.3) 

[b] What does T do to the momentum-space wave function 4>(p) = ^ r [^]? 

[c] Prove that T is anti-linear. 




486 


Chap. 10 Operators in Quantum Mechanics I 



CHAPTER 11 


Operators in Quantum Mechanics 10 

To Commute or Not to Commute 


11.1 Simultaneous Eigenstates and the Commutator 

11.2 Evaluating Commutators: The Right Way, the Wrong Way, 
and the Easy Way 

11.3 Operator Manipulations and Matrix Representations 

11.4 Commutators and Uncertainty Principles 

11.5 Constants of the Motion in Classical and Quantum Physics 

11.6 Conservation Laws in Quantum Physics 

11.7 Physical Laws and the Correspondence Principle 

* 11.8 The Strangest "Uncertainty Relation" of Them All 

* 11.9 Final Thoughts: Conservation "Laws," Dogma, and the 

Fall of Parity 



At the present moment 

you thrill with the glamour of the situation 

and the anticipation of the hunt. 

Where would that thrill be 

if I had been as definite^as a timetable? 

I ask only a little patience, Mr. Mac, 
and all will be clear to you. 

—Sherlock Holmes 
in The Valley of Fear 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 

Like a weevil in a tin of flour, the commutator lurked throughout Chap. 10; every time 
we considered more than one observable, commutators appeared. Thus, in Example 10.6 
(§ 10.3) we learned that whether the commutator of two Hermitian operators is nonzero 
determines whether their product is Hermitian. And, most strikingly, in § 10.8 we discov¬ 
ered that for a symmetric one-dimensional system, the existence of bound-state spatial 
functions with definite parity is intimately tied to the commutator of the Hamiltonian and 
the parity operator. 

In this chapter the commutator comes into its own. First, we’ll investigate simulta¬ 
neous eigenfunctions and their origin in the commutativity of certain Hermitian operators 
(§ 11.1), generalizing the remarks at the end of the last chapter. Next, we’ll master the 
manipulation of commutators in algebraic expressions (§ 11.2-11.3). Then, for the piice 
de resistance , we’ll return to uncertainty principles. These principles are among the most 
powerful and general results of physical theory, for they express fundamental limitations 
on our ability to acquire through measurement knowledge about two or more observables. 
As we’ll discover in § 11.4-11.5, these physical limitations are a direct consequence of 
a rather abstract mathematical question: do the operators that represent the observables 
being measured commute? 

The commutator does more than limit our knowledge of the microworld; it appears 
in conservation laws (§ 11.5-11.6). The form and structure of conservation laws in 
quantum physics differs strikingly from those of classical physics, as you might expect 
since we abandoned trajectories in Chap. 2. Yet, there is a connection between these 
theories: the Correspondence Principle. 

Last seen in § 5.7, the Correspondence Principle (as we now know it) tells us that 
we relate measurable quantities of microscopic systems to their analogs in the macroscope 
via expectation values. But physics is the study not just of physical quantities but also 
of laws and relationships between these quantities. In this chapter the commutator will 
lead us to the connection between the laws of quantum and classical physics. This result, 
called Ehrenfest’s Theorem (§ 11.7), is one of the most satisfying strands in the beautiful 
tapestry of quantum mechanics. 

To bring to a close our exploration of operators in quantum physics we’ll look at 
one final uncertainty relation. Not all uncertainty relations are alike, and in § 11.8 we’ll 
meet a most peculiar one, the energy-time uncertainty relation. We now know enough to 
understand the origin of this uncertainty principle and its role in physical phenomena such 
as the decay of excited states of atoms, a physical example I’ll bring on stage in § 11.8. 

11.1 SIMULTANEOUS EIGENSTATES AND THE COMMUTATOR 

In § 10.5 I introduced you to eigenstates : special states whose wave functions are 
eigenfunctions of one (or more) operator(s), e.g ., 

488 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



QVq = q* q - 


( 11 . 1 ) 


What is special about an eigenstate of the observable Q is that in this state Q is sharp. 
That is, an ensemble measurement of Q will yield the value q and only that value; for 
this state, A Q = 0 and (Q) = q. 

Chapter 10 ended on a somewhat enigmatic note, with a remark concerning state 
functions that satisfy eigenvalue equations like (11.1) for two operators. In § 10.8 we 
proved that such eigenfunctions exist for the operators ii and ft if and only if the potential 
operator V in H = T + V commutes with ft. This, in turn, happens if and only if V(x ) 
is symmetric. 

Generalizing this example, we can define a simultaneous eigenstate as one whose 
state function is an eigenfunction of two (or more) operators. For observables Q and 
R , we could label such a state function by the eigenvalues q and r in the eigenvalue 
equations and write these equations as 


Q*<,,r = ?*Vr 
m„, r = r$,, r . 


simultaneous eigenstate of Q and R 


( 11 . 2 ) 


Don’t forget that the state function in Eqs. (11.2) is (implicitly) a function of time. 
For example, the (time-dependent) wave function that represents a stationary state of a 
symmetric one-dimensional potential satisfies the simultaneous eigenvalue equations 


W(M) = £*(s,i) (11.3a) 

ft$(a;,0 = ±^(M). (11.36) 


In a simultaneous eigenstate, both observables Q and R are sharp, so 


(Q) = q AQ = 0 (11.4a) 

{R) = r AR = 0. (11.46) 

In general, of course, the statistical quantities (Q), ( R ), AQ, and A R depend on time. 
But if, as in Eqs. (11.4), the state function used to calculate them represents a simul¬ 
taneous eigenstate of both observables, then these quantities are independent of time. 
[Nonetheless, we formally evaluate these quantities from the state function ^ at the 
same time. This seemingly pedantic point is important because of the implications of 
Eqs. (11.4) for measurement.] 

Question 11-1 

Prove that Eqs. (11.4) follow from (11.2) for a simultaneous eigenstate of Q and R. 


The essential point of Eqs. (11.4) is that a “simultaneous measurement” of Q and 
R —one in which both properties are measured at the same time—yields uniquely the 
values q and r. To appreciate the physical significance of this remark, you’ll have to 
wait until Chap. 13, where we confront the problem of measurement. But for a preview, 
look at Fig. 11.1, which is a generalization of our schematic for measurement of a single 
observable (Fig. 10.1). 

Question 11-2 

Consider a state of the infinite square well that is represented by the state function 

^(a;, t) = \ly COs(27Ty). 

V L* L 


Sec. 11.1 Simultaneous Eigenstates and the Commutator 489 





(0 


Figure 11.1 A schematic representation 
of simultaneous measurement of two 
observables, Q and R, on a system. Three 
quantum states are considered. The state in 

(a) is a simultaneous eigenstate of these 
two observables, so all members of the 
ensemble yield the same value of Q 
and the same value of R. The state in 

(b) is an eigenstate of Q but not of R, so 
measurement of the latter observable yields 
a distribution of values, i.e., the value of R 
is uncertain. In the state in (c), which is 
not an eigenstate of either observable, both 
measurements yield a distribution of results. 


Is this state a simultaneous eigenfunction of H and p? Of any two other observables? 
Explain your reasoning. 

Do All Pairs of Operators Define Simultaneous 
Eigenfunctions? 

The definition (11.2) of a simultaneous eigenstate raises two questions about any pair of 
observables Q and R : 

1 . Is a particular state a simultaneous eigenstate of Q and 

2. Do any simultaneous eigenstates of Q and R exist? 

In an important sense, the second of these questions is more general than the first, 
which can easily be answered by checking whether or not the particular function satisfies 
Eqs. (11.2) [c./., Question 11-2]. 

The answer to the second question depends on the operators Q and R. We know, 
for example, that there exist simultaneous eigenfunctions of ft and H (for a symmetric 
potential) [see Eqs. (11.3)]. But there do not exist simultaneous eigenfunctions of x and 
p. According to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, for any state of any system the 
uncertainty product of x and p is positive: 

A x(t) A p(t) > \h > 0. (11.5) 

This principle explicitly prohibits the existence in nature of states in which x or p (or 
both) is sharp; i.e., a simultaneous eigenfunction of x and p cannot represent a physi¬ 
cally realizable quantum state. Clearly, not all pairs of observables have simultaneous 
eigenstates. 

490 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




This observation raises several questions. What property of x and p proscribes the 
existence of simultaneous eigenfunctions of these operators? And what property of other 
pairs of operators allows the existence of simultaneous eigenfunctions? Given arbitrary 
observables Q and R , how can we ascertain whether or not simultaneous eigenstates of 
Q and R exist? 

We already have several clues. We know (from § 10.8) that the existence of simul¬ 
taneous eigenstates of H and ft hinges on whether or not ['H , ft ] = 0 ; this commutator 
is zero if V{x ) is symmetric, in which case such eigenstates do exist, but it’s nonzero 
otherwise. We also know (from Chap. 5) that x and p, which don’t support simultaneous 
eigenfunctions, don’t commute, for [£,p] = ihi. Could it be that only operators that 
commute support simultaneous eigenfunctions? You bet it could. 

The Commutator is the Key 

One of the most important theorems in quantum mechanics states conditions for the 
existence of simultaneous eigenfunctions: 


Proclamation 11.1 

A complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions of two Hermitian operators exists if and only 
if the operators commute. 


Note carefully that this statement says nvo things: 

1. Operators that commute define a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions. 

2. Two operators that share a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions commute. 

Before discussing this proclamation, let’s write down its mathematical form. If 
Hermitian operators Q and R obey the commutation relation 

[ 0 ,£]= 0 , ( 11 . 6 ) 

then they define a set of functions {x^.,.}, each element of which satisfies the equations 

QXq.r = qX'l.r (11.7tf) 

RXq,r=rXq,r- (11.7/?) 


Moreover, the set {x 9 ,r} is complete , so any well-behaved function \1> can be expanded 


^ S C *h'Xq,r 

all q all r 


expansion in complete set 
of simultaneous eigenfunctions 


( 11 . 8 ) 


1 In writing such expansions, be careful not to drop any variables on the right-hand side. Any inde¬ 
pendent variables on which depends that are not variables of the eigenfunctions \q.r must appear in the 
coefficients c f/ , r . Usually, this means that these coefficients depend on time, as in Eq. (11.10). Another com¬ 
mon situation will surface in Volume II, where we’ll study quantum states of a particle in three dimensions. 
In spherical coordinates, the wave functions for such states depend on r, 0 , and <£, and we often expand these 
wave functions in sets that are complete in 9 and <j> but not r. In such expansions, the coefficients depend on 
r and on t. 


Sec. 11.1 Simultaneous Eigenstates and the Commutator 491 





The coefficient c q , r is the projection of ^ on the eigenfunction Xq.v 

Aside: The Importance of Completeness. The completeness of the set of simul- 
* taneous eigenfunctions defined by two commuting operators is a crucial feature of 
Proclamation 11.1 and is often overlooked or misunderstood by novice quantum me¬ 
chanics. The existence of a single simultaneous eigenfunction of two operators is no 
guarantee that the operators commute. The most famous such counterexample occurs 
in the study of the orbital angular momentum operator L. This is a vector operator, 
i.e., it has three component operators, L x , L y , and L z . No two of these commute; 
e.g., [L x ,L y ] ^ 0. Yet, there exists one quantum state in which L x , L y , and L z are 
sharp: the state in which the orbital angular momentum is zero. But a complete set of 
simultaneous eigenfunctions of any two component operators— L x and L y , say—does 
not exist. We will find out why such counterexamples exist in § 11.4, where we will 
connect the commutator to uncertainty relations. And we will investigate L and its 
properties in Volume II. 

We can evaluate the coefficients in the expansion (11.8) from the state function via 
our usual expansion (10.109/?), 

C q ,r = {x q ,r |*>. 01-9) 

These coefficients depend on time. For example, the wave function of a single particle 
in three dimensions depends on three spatial variables r (x, y , and 2 in rectangular 
coordinates; r, 6, and cp in spherical coordinates) and on time. We can expand such a 
function, in a complete set {x< 7 .r( 0 } of eigenfunctions of (commuting) operators 

Q and R that act on functions of r, i.e., 

t) = c ?..'Wx 7 ,r(r). (11.10) 

all q all r 

The projection c r/ .,.(f) of ^(r ,t) on Xq,r is, according to Eq. (11.9), 

<v(t)= J X* q ArMr,t)dv. (11.11) 

all space 

In the next chapter we’ll explore the uses and interpretation of Eq. (11.11). For now, 
just note the time dependence of the projections, c 9i ,.(/), and the simple extension of 
Eq. (10.110) to get (11.9). 

Argument: The proof that commuting operators define a complete set of simultaneous 
eigenfunctions is rather abstract and convoluted; rather than reproduce it here, I’ll refer 
the curious to more advanced texts. 2 But I do want to show you the proof of the 
other side of this theorem, that hvo operators that share a complete set of simultaneous 
eigenfunctions necessarily commute. This proof illustrates techniques of operator algebra 
of great power and applicability. 

This demonstration hinges on the meaning of completeness and commutativity and 
on a simple consequence of the equations satisfied by the functions Xq,r- Consider what 

2 Actually, this proof is not too hard if we are dealing only with non-degenerate eigenvalues. If we 
operate on the eigenvalue equation Q\ q = q\ q with R and use the (assumed) commutativity of the two 
operators, we obtain Q[/?Xg] = gl^X?]- Now, if q is non-degenerate, then the function Rx q must be 
proportional to x q , and the proportionality constant is just the eigenvalue of R, i.e., Rgq = r\ q . This proves 
that Xq is also an eigenfunction of R. No such simple argument, however, can cope with the common case of 
degenerate eigenvalues. For details, see § V.7 of Elementary Quantum Mechanics by D. Saxon (San Francisco: 
Holden-Day, 1968). 


492 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



happens when we apply the operator [Q,R] to one of the simultaneous eigenfunctions 
of Q and R: 

[Q,R]x,,r = QRx<,.r-RQx,,r- * (11.12) 

Because Xq.r satisfies the eigenvalue equations (11.2), the operators on the right-hand 
side of (11.12) yield 

[Q,R]Xg.r = qrxq.r-rqxq.r, (11.13a) 

= ( qr~rq)x q ,r . (\\A3b) 

But numbers commute. So the commutator of two commuting observables “annihilates” 
any simultaneous eigenfunction of its constituent operators, 

[4£]x,.,- =0- (11.14) 

I hope you can see that Equation (II .14) does not, in itself, prove that the operators 
Q and R commute. Remember that to ascertain whether or not two operators commute, 
we must let their commutator act on an arbitrary (physically-admissible) state function # 
and see if the result is zero : 

[Q,H]® = 0. (11.15) 

It is at this point that the completeness of the set of functions {x< 7 ,r} comes in handy: 
we can expand the state function ^ a la Eq. (11.8) and insert the result into (11.15), viz., 

[4-R] X^ < VX,.r = °- (11.16) 

all q all r 

The commutator doesn’t affect the expansion coefficients—they’re just complex numbers— 
so this operator slides through to the eigenfunction, giving 

c «,r [4 £]*,,.• = 0. (11.17) 

all q all r 

But according to Eq. (11.14), each term on the left-hand side of (11.17) is zero. Hence 
the sum is zero and we conclude that 

[4fl]=0. (11.18) 

i.e., Q and R commute. 

Q. E. D. 

Examples and Counterexamples 

We will encounter lots of examples of commuting operators and their simultaneous 
eigenfunctions for two- and three-dimensional systems in Volume II. For instance, the 
Hamiltonian of the hydrogen atom, which consists of one electron and one proton, com¬ 
mutes with the operator L 2 that represents the square of the orbital angular momentum 
of the electron with respect to the proton. Consequently there exists a complete set of 
stationary states—eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian—that are also eigenfunctions of L 2 . 
The wave functions of these simultaneous eigenstates represent the familiar atomic or¬ 
bitals (Is, 2s, 2p 0 , etc.) that you probably studied in high school chemistry. These 
eigenfunctions, and their counterparts for orbitals of other atoms, are the building blocks 
of the quantum mechanics of atomic and molecular physics. 

For now, though, our principal example of a pair of commuting operators is ft 
and the Hamiltonian of a symmetric potential. In § 10.8 we showed that ft and the 


Sec. 11.1 Simultaneous Eigenstates and the Commutator 493 



Hamiltonian of a SHO commute, and we discussed the corresponding complete set of 
simultaneous eigenfunctions, {^„(rc);n = 0,1,2,... }. The form of the expansion of an 
arbitrary wave function ^{x,t) in this set is slightly simpler than Eq. (11.8) because it 
requires only one summation, i.e. 

»(*>«) = U1.19) 

u=0 

Formally, the general result (11.8) prescribes a second summation over all allowed eigen¬ 
values of A: -1 and +1. But for this system such a summation would be redundant, 
because each Hamiltonian eigenfunction (s) has definite parity, even or odd. 3 

Be careful not to generalize too hastily. Simplifications such as the elimination 
of a summation in (11.19) are rare, and one must be wary of blithely throwing away 
summations in an expansion of a wave function in a set of simultaneous eigenfunctions. 
In general, one should live by the following rule: 


Rule 

When expanding a function in a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions of two (or 
more) commuting operators, sum over all eigenvalues of all observables. 


In our investigation into continuum states we encountered another pair of commut¬ 
ing operators: T and p. For example, the potential of a free particle is zero, so H = T. 
Hence the Hamiltonian commutes with p , and these commuting operators define the 
simultaneous eigenfunctions 

fep(s) = ("•*» 

by the eigenvalue equations 1 


:, I could, of course, be tiresomely pedantic and write Eq. (11.19) as 


+i 

all Eq=- 1 

I would then note that for even-parity Hamiltonian eigenfunctions the coefficient ce,- i = 0 and for odd-parity 
eigenfunctions, ce,+i = 0, which would lead me back to a single summation, over n. 

4 If you read the footnotes in Chap. 10 concerning expansions in a complete set of eigenfunctions with 
continuous eigenvalues, you know how to write such an expansion for {ipE,p( x )}- We integrate rather than 
sum over the eigenvalues p. We need not integrate over E because the free-particle equation E = p 2 /2m 
establishes a correspondence between the values of p and the energies E. (This correspondence is not, 
however, one-to-one.) Consequently if we integrate over p from -oo to +oo we are assured of picking up 
all the eigenfunctions in the set {V>E,p(a)}- (That is to say, the index E on these eigenfunctions is, for this 
system, redundant.) The complete set expansion, 


*(M) 



—iut/Ti 



Cp(t)ll>E,p( x ) d P' 


is, of course, just the Fourier integral for a wave packet in terms of the momentum-space amplitude $(p). 
As I noted in Chap. 10, this momentum-space state function appears in the projection c,,(t) of ^(x.i) on 
1#>JS,p(*)- 


494 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




where 


P*pE,p( x ) = Wl>E, P {x) (11.21a) 

Wtfs tP (*) = %, P (a:) (11.216) 


V 

E = 

2m 


What Commutativity Does Not Imply 


(11.21c) 


\ Just as important as mastering the implications of the commutativity of two operators 
I is knowing what this property does not imply. Readers new to quantum mechanics 
often incorrectly conclude that if Q and R commute, then all eigenfunctions of one 
operator—say, Q —are necessarily eigenfunctions of the other. But only under very 
special circumstances is this conclusion correct. 5 To see a simple, familiar situation 
where it is wrong, consider Table 11.1, which contains three quantum states of a one¬ 
dimensional simple harmonic oscillator. State 1 is stationary, so its wave function is 
a simultaneous eigenfunction of the energy and parity operators. The wave function 
for State 2 is a linear combination of two even-parity stationary-state functions: the 
wave functions for the ground state and for the second excited state. State 2 is not, of 
course, an eigenstate of energy, but because of the particular stationary states that make 
it up, it is an eigenstate of parity. So the wave function that represents State 2 is an 
eigenfunction of ft but not of H, even though these two operators do commute. Finally, 
the superposition of the ground and first excited states, State 3, is not an eigenfunction 
of either operator. 

My point is that the commutativity of two operators certifies only that simultaneous 
eigenfunctions of the two operators are there if you need them. This property says nothing 
about a particular state of the system; such a state may or may not be an eigenstate of 
one or both of the commuting operators. Finally, and in this regard, it’s vital that 
you keep straight in your mind the difference between simultaneous eigenfunctions and 
a simultaneous eigenstate. The former need not be (and, in general, are not) state 
functions. The latter is a special quantum state whose wave function is a simultaneous 
eigenfunction of two operators. 


TABLE 11.1 THREE STATES OF A SYMMETRIC ONE-DIMENSIONAL 
SYSTEM. 


State 

Wave Function 

n 

n 

1 

7 

<u 

II 

AE = 0 

An = o 

2 

*(*, t) = [tf()(a:, f) + * 2 (s, t)] 

AE > 0 

An = o 

3 

'Hx,tp= ^ [^o(a:,<) + 'I'iGM)] 

AE)~> 0 

An> o 



5 Thc simplest case in which all eigenfunctions of Q are necessarily eigenfunctions of R is when the 
eigenvalue q is non-degenerate; in this case, Xn ' s necessarily an eigenfunction of R. For more on this matter, 
see Chap. II.D of Quantum Mechanics by C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, and F. Laloe (New York: Wiley, 1977). 


Sec. 11.1 Simultaneous Eigenstates and the Commutator 495 



Clearly, the commutator plays a crucial role in determining the nature of possible 
quantum states of a microscopic system. (Any residual doubts on this matter can be dis¬ 
pelled by peeking ahead to § 11.4.) To become more agile manipulators of commutators, 
let’s take a (brief) detour into the algebra of these beasties. 


/ 

11.2 EVALUATING COMMUTATORS: THE RIGHT WAY, THE 
WRONG WAY, AND THE EASY WAY 


A singer can shatter a glass 
with the proper high note. ... 
But the simplest way for anyone 
to break a glass is 
simply to drop it on the floor. 

—Marius to Lestat in 
The Vampire Lestat 
by Anne Rice 


Commutators are ubiquitous; in our voyage through the microworld, we will meet them 
at every turn. So far, we’ve encountered only rather simple commutators. But to navigate 
the deeper, more complex waters to come, we must be able to “evaluate” a commutator— 
i.e., to reduce it to the simplest (operator) form. We might, for example, have to contend 
with the likes of [p, x 2 ], [T, £], or even [ Q , e R ]. 

The most challenging commutators are those involving operator functions , such 
as x 2 , p 2 , or e R . We know from § 10.2 how to subdue such operators: expand ’em 
in their power series [see Eqs. (10.12)—(10.13)]. And we know from § 5.5 the rule for 
manipulating commutators, which, after all, are just operators: 



Rule 

Evaluate an operator expression by letting the expression act on a function of the variables 
in the constituent operators. 


If, for example, we want to prove, for arbitrary operators A and B the relation 

[A,B) = -[B,A], (11.22) 

we may be tempted to expand the left-hand side, then switch the order of the resulting 
products, viz., 

[A,B]= AB-BA (11.23a) 

= -{bA-Ab) (11.23 b) 

[B, A] . (IL23 c) 

This approach isn’t wrong, but it fosters bad habits. 

In this section I’ll show you safe and efficient ways to evaluate commutators, point 
out a couple of traps for the unwary, and provide useful tables of commutator relations. 
As you work through this section, please obey the above rule (even when, for purposes 


496 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




of illustration, I violate it). After you have practiced (a lot) with commutator algebra, 
you will be able to confidently and correctly perform algebraic feats of legerdemain in 
the style of (11.23). 

Basic Commutator Relations 

We’ll consider first commutator relations satisfied by arbitrary operators that may or may 
not be Hermitian. (So I’ll denote these operators by A, B, C, ... .) Then we’ll focus on 
commutator relations for Hermitian operators, i.e., those that involve x, p, and functions 
thereof. 

Table 11.2 contains most commutator relations you’re likely to need. You can 
prove each of these operator equations by following the guidelines suggested above. 



•i*r 


TABLE 11.2 HANDY COMMUTATOR RELATIONS. 


[. A , A" ] = 0 

(I) 

[A,b] = -[b,a] 

(II) 

[A,cB] = c[A,b] 

(III) 

[i,(B + C)j = [A,b] + [A,c] 

(IV) 

[A,bc] = [A,b]c + b[A,c] 

(V) 

[A,/(A)j =0 

(VI) 


Question 11-3 

The order of operators is, as we know, crucial and must not be cavalierly changed. To 
illustrate, prove that the relation obtained by interchanging the order of operators in the 
second term on the right-hand side of Property V is not, in general, true. That is, prove that 

[A.BC] ± [A,B\C+ [A,C]B. (11.24) 

You can prove this either by general argument or by counterexamples. Under what condi¬ 
tions, if any, are the left- and right-hand sides of Eq. (11.24) equal? 

Question 11-4 
Prove that 

[A, [B,C]] + [s, [C,A]] + [c, [A,B]] = 0 . (11.25) 


As I noted above, the ringers in commutator algebra are relations involving operator 
functions , but we can conquer these using the power series expansions of the functions. 
-For example, to prove Property VI, [A v /(A)]-=-0, we need only expand the operator 
/(A) a la Eq. (10.13), using the coefficients bj of the series expansion of the function 

f(A). 

OO 

f(A) = Y. b J AJ - (H.26) 

,=o 


Sec. 11.2 Evaluating Commutators 497 




With this expansion, the commutator on the left-hand side of Property VI, when acting 
on an arbitrary function g(x), gives 6 


[AJ(A)]g(x) = '£ i b j [A,ti}g(x). 


j=0 


(11.27) 


According to Property I, [A, A" ] = 0 for any power n, so each term in (11.27) is zero. 
This proves Property VI. 

And so forth. 


Question 11-5 

Prove that 


[A,b] =0 => [b,/(A)]=o. 

Commutation Relations Involving x and p 


(11.28) 


Most operators in quantum mechanics can be written as functions of x and p. So 
the most important commutation relations are those involving these operators and their 
powers. We can evaluate all such commutators using the properties in Table 11.2 and 
the fundamental relation 


x,p] = ihl 


(11.29) 


which we proved in Example 5.4. 


Example 11.1. A Commutator for the Linear Potential 

In the text and problems for Chap. 9 we saw the usefulness of the linear potential V (x) = ox, 
where a is a constant that depends on the particular system. If, in the course of applying 
this model to a physical system, we run into the commutator [T/.T], how do we proceed? 

Well, since the Hamiltonian is H = T + V and the kinetic energy operator T = 
p 2 /(2m) commutes with itself, the commutator of these two operators trivially reduces to 

[w,r] = [V,f] =a[i,f] = 2^[*,P 2 ]- (11.30) 

One way to simplify the remaining commutator [x,p 2 ] is to expand p 2 and use Property 
V in Table 11.2, viz.. 


[x,p 2 ]/(x) = [x,pp]f(x) (11.31o) 

= [x,p]pf{x) + p[x,p]f{x) (11.31/a) 

= 2 ihpf{x). (11.31c) 


So the commutator of H and T is actually a much simpler operator than its initial form 
suggests: 


[*•*]-!* 


(11.12) 


°For simplicity, I have assumed in this section that all arbitrary operators act on functions of x. But 
the relations we are proving all pertain to operators that act on functions of more variables, as we’ll see in 
Volume II. 


498 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




Always try to simplify complicated commutators as soon as they appear in problems. The 
operator on the right-hand side of (11.32) is much easier to work with than the one on the 
left-hand side. 


Machinations such as those of Example 11.1 are so common in quantum mechanics 
that a table of commutation relations involving these fundamental operators is a valuable 
time saver. For future reference, I’ve compiled such a compendium in Table 11.3. 7 


TABLE 11.3 COMMUTATOR RELATIONS INVOLVING THE 
POSITION AND MOMENTUM OPERATORS 


[.i: 2 , p ] = 2ihx 

(I) 

[s,P 2 ] =2ihp 

(ID 

[.£ 2 ,p 2 ] = 2iti(2xp - ihl) 

(HI) 

for arbitrary operator functions f(p) and g(x): 


[z./(p)] = ih-jzf(p) 

(IV) 

[piS(®)] = -ih-jrgix) 

(V) 

for a Hamiltonian fi = T + V(x): 


[*■*]=“* 

(VI) 

(VII) 


Question 11-6 

Use Property IV in Table 11.3 to prove Property VI. Use Property IV to prove Property II. 
Can you prove Property IV? 


Question 11-7 

Prove that for any power n. 


x , p" = ihnp' 1 




(11.33) 


The easiest way to prove this relation is via a technique called mathematical induction. 
First prove that it is true for the lowest power, n = 1. Then assume it to be true for power 
n and prove that it therefore holds for power n -f 1. (Since the relation is true for n — 1, 
it must be true for n = 2 and hence for all higher values of n, by the same “stair-step” 
argument.) 


7 Note carefully that the arbitrary functions in Properties IV and V are functions of one or the other of 
the operators x and p. Under some circumstances these properties apply to functions of both operators, such 
as h(x,p). But because x and p don’t commute, the applicability of these properties depends on the nature of 
the function h(x,p). So be very careful if you ever have to work out a commutator involving such a function 
and want to use Properties IV and V. 


Sec. 11.2 Evaluating Commutators 499 




Trouble with Commutators 


Mulling over Example 11.1, you may have wondered, “Why on earth does he persist in 
cluttering up derivations such as Eqs. (11.31) with arbitrary functions? Surely so simple 
a derivation can safely be performed without lugging along f{x)” 

Right you are. We could work through this derivation using operator equations with 
minimal chance of error if, as in (11.31), we work at a rather high “level of abstraction.” 
That is, if at no point do we introduce an explicit form for the instructions x or p —a 
form such as p in the position representation (p = —itid/dx) or x in the momentum 
representation (x = ihd/dp). 

This example suggests a useful guideline for all operator manipulations, whether 
or not commutators are involved: 


Rule 

Whenever possible, manipulate operators as abstract entities rather than as explicit instruc¬ 
tions in a particular representation. 


To see this rule in action and to appreciate how ignoring it can be hazardous to the health 
of your solution, let’s consider another example. 

Example 11.2. A Commutator for the Simple Harmonic Oscillator 

Suppose we need to evaluate [7-f.p] for the SHO Hamiltonian 7 i = T + \mwlx 2 . [Such 
an evaluation is a critical step in determining the constants of the motion of this system (see 
§ 11.5).] 

Let’s first express the operators in this commutator in the position representation and 
let them act on a function f(x). Noting that T commutes with p , we begin with 


[H,p]f(x)= [V,p]f(x)= ^mvo[x 2 ,p]f(x). (11.34) 

Getting explicit, we write the commutator on the right-hand side of (11.34) as 

[.t 2 , p ] f(x) = x 2 pf(x) - px 2 f(x) (11.35 a) 

= dl.35/,) 

The derivatives in (11.35/;) are easy to evaluate, e.g., 

f [*’/(*)] = + 2 xf(x). (11.36) 


We now have only to insert (11.36) into (11.35/;) to simplify the right-hand side of the latter 
to 

\x 2 ,p]f(x) = -ihx 2 ^f- +ihx 2 -f- + 2ihxf(x) (11.37) 

— L - J - —dx dx 

[x 2 ,p] f(x) = 2ihxf(x). (11.38) 

Substituting this simple result into the right-hand side of Eq. (11.34), we conclude 
( finally ) that 

[W,p] = ihmw'ox. [for the SHO] (11.39) 


500 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




Is all this work really necessary? I would argue that it is. Here (with trenchant 
commentary) is an example of the kind of trouble one might get into working this problem 
with operators in the position representation but no functions: 


[w,p] = [ 


I 1 2 2 d 

= l-mu, oX 


okay 


(11.40a) 


ifi 2 ( 2 d d o\ 

— -ytnw 0 — - —x I Bad judgment, but okay (11.40/;) 




[H,p] = ( x 2 p - 2ihx). 


oops! 

nope 


(11.40c) 
(11.40c/) 



We got into trouble at Eq. (11.40c) because we were trying to manipulate derivatives as 
operators rather than manipulating derivatives of functions as functions. This is, obviously, 
the wrong way to evaluate a commutator. 

The easiest way to evaluate [7Y,p] for the SHO is the most abstract way : 


[«.p] = p\p] + [M 

= (M 

= -77iWo (2 ihx) = ihrmoQX. 



(11.41a) 

(Table 11.2: Property I] 

(11.41/;) 

[Table 11.2: Property III] 

(11.41c) 

[Table 11.3: Property I] 

(11.4 Id) 


Notice how this evaluation proceeds without mishap if we avoid an explicit representation. 



Question 11-8 

Evaluate the commutator of x and H for the SHO two ways (the “right” and “easy” ways). 

The bottom line in operator manipulations—as in all problem solving—is the theme 
I keep harping on: never proceed through algebra mindlessly, on autopilot. Instead, think 
at every step about what you are doing and the alternate paths open to you. If you solve 
problems this way you will learn more, have more fun, and be far less likely to wind up 
with the wrong answer. 


11.3 OPERATOR MANIPULATIONS AND MATRIX 
REPRESENTATIONS 

Many and varied are the theorems of quantum mechanics. But few are the theorems 
you’ll find in this book. Our focus is not on mathematical proofs but on quantum 
physics. Still, some theorems are so powerful, so useful, that they cannot be ignored. 
The one we’ ll prove in this section illustrates the interpla y of various aspects of the 
mathematics of operators that we’ve examined in Chap. 10 and § 11.1—11.2. 8 


8 The usefulness of this theorem will not be apparent until Volume II, where we’ll learn how to solve 
problems so complicated that their Schrodinger equation is not amenable to exact solution. Implementing these 
approximation methods is much easier if full use is made of Proclamation 11.2. Still, it’s a short proof, a 
useful exercise, so I recommend that you don’t skip it. 


Sec. 11.3 Operator Manipulations and Matrix Representations 501 



(1 \A2a) 
(11.426) 


Consider two commuting Hermitian operators: Q and R such that 

Q* = Q and & = R 
[Q,R] =0. 

Suppose that Xq and Xq' are tvv0 distinct eigenfunctions of Q [/.<?., with different eigen¬ 
values ( q ^ q ')] but that these functions are not eigenfunctions of R. Therefore, the only 
eigenvalue equations these functions satisfy are 

Qx q = QXq (11.43a) 

QXq'=q'Xq>- (11.436) 

We’ll now prove that the matrix element of R between Xq and Xq' is zero: 

(x, | R | X,') = 0. (11.44) 

Question 11-9 

Prove that the matrix element of Q between these eigenfunctions, (x Q | Q \ Xq') f° r Q # <t '. 
is zero. Justify carefully and in detail each step of your argument. 

Equation (11.44) may seem magical, for Q, the operator that defines the functions 
in the matrix element (x q \R\ Xq')> has only the most ephemeral relationship to R, the 
operator that appears in this matrix element. Novices trying to prove that (11.44) follows 
from (11.42) sometimes muddy the waters by introducing a complete set of simultaneous 
eigenfunctions of Q and R. Although not a foolish approach to the proof, this gambit isn’t 
necessary, as the argument to follow will attest. First let’s state our conjecture in words. 


Proclamation 11.2 

The matrix element of an operator with respect to eigenfunctions of a second operator that 
commutes with the first is zero if the eigenvalues of the two eigenfunctions are different. 


Argument: To prove this claim, we must somehow develop an expression involving 
the matrix element (x q \ R \ Xq')- The only connection between R and the functions 
in this braket is the commutation relation Eq. (11.426). So a sensible first step is to 
sandwich the operator [Q,R] between the eigenfunctions Xq and Xq'- According to 
(11.42) the resulting Dirac braket is zero: 


{Xq [Q> £] Xq') = (Xq | QR ~ RQ \ Xq') = 0- 


The matrix element in (11.45) consists of two terms, 

(Xq \QR~RQ\ Xq') = (Xq \ QR | Xq') ~ (Xq \ RQ \ Xq ')» 


(11.45) 

(11.46) 


each of which looks like“it might be persuadedToyield a matrixelemenrof R only. 

To get such a result we must eliminate Q from each braket in Eq. (11.46). This 
chore is rather simple, because the functions in these brakets are eigenfunctions of Q. 
To position this operator so it can act on its eigenfunctions, we use its Hermiticity, viz., 

(QXq\RXq')-(Xq\RQXq')=0- (11.47) 


502 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




Now in the first term, Q x , = q Xq . We must be careful in removing the constant from 
this braket, for Q Xq appears to the left of the bar in this Dirac braket. Were a complex 
its complex conjugate q * would emerge from the braket. But q is an eigenvalue of a 
Herm, an operator and hence is real. So this number emerges from the Dirac braket 
without change (see Property II of Table 10.4). In the second term, no such questions 
arise in dealing with Q Xq , = q‘ Xl ,. Therefore, Eq. (11.47) becomes 

i(xi | R | x<r) - q'{xq | R \ xx) = o. (i i.48o) 

Factoring out the matrix element common to both terms in (11.48a), we have 

(« “ «')(x? | R | Xq ') = 0. (11.486) 

But since the eigenvalues q and q' are different, their difference q-q' is not zero This 
means that the matrix element must be zero: 


\At, | n | xy) = 0. (11.48c) 

Q. E. D. 

Question 11-10 

lr:r er r how ‘y* ihis resui,? suppose you need ,o eva,uate «« *>■ 

77 I ft I!/ \ y F 0P ? rat ° r YTk tW ° diSti " CI Simple l,arm0nic oscilialor eigenfunctions, 
\Vn | li | Explain in detail how to apply Proclamation 11.2 to this problem. 

Matrix Representations of Operators 

Another way to express Proclamation 11.2 is to say “the off-diagonal matrix elements of 
R with respect to eigenfunctions of Q, with which it commutes, are zero.” Implicit in this 

“; trT, j ?r;f g an opera,or by a « a pa “— 

When we say a matrix "represents” an operator we mean that the matrix contains 
the same informal,on as the operator, albeit expressed in a different way. The idea of 
matrix representations of operators originated with Heisenberg, who formulated quantum 
theory as ma, n.v mechanics* It achieved full flowering with Dirac, who formulated 
quantum theory using linear algebra in a vector space, an approach that leads inexorably 

It is easy to see the genesis of this idea. Each Dirac braket ( X „ I R I v ,) j s a 
(complex) number that can be uniquely labelled by the quantum numbers q and q’ Let's 
call this number R qy . Collect together all such matrix elements—by constructing all 
possible Dirac brakets using all elements of the complete set of eigenfunctions fy 0 }—and 
arrange these numbers into a matrix: 1 

( •fyfl , 9 l Rq\ , 9 2 #9j ,93 • . . \ 

^ 2,91 -^ 92,92 ^ 92,93 ■ • • 

^ 93 . 9 , * 93,92 ' # 93,93 ... ^- ( 1 1 - 49 ) 


H. HalkafffewYo!l" w!tev n 'l98 f | YdVTYf 5 ; Y' ? r examplc ' Chap - 2 0f Q " m " um Mechanics by 
D. Willke (Rending, Mass • Addison-Wesle^ isM) *> Qmmm Mechanics by B. Dicke and 


Sec. 11.3 Operator Manipulations and Matrix Representations 


503 



Notice that the eigenvalue to the left of the operator is the row index of the matrix and 
the eigenvalue to the right is the column index. The matrix R is called the matrix 
representation of R with respect to the eigenfunctions of Q. 10 By the way, there 
is nothing special about the set of eigenfunctions with respect to which we define the 
matrix R; a huge number of different matrix representations of a given operator can be 
constructed, by simply choosing different sets of eigenfunctions. 

In tenns of the matrix representation (11.49), Proclamation 11.2 takes on its most 
elegant form: 

(11.50) 

To see a typical matrix representation, let’s write down the representation x of the 
position operator x for the simple harmonic oscillator with respect to the eigenfunctions 
of H , the functions ij> n (x). Each element of this matrix is a Dirac braket of the form 

/ oo 

7 p*(x)x'lp n >{x)dx. (11.51) 

-OO 

So the matrix representation of x with respect to the eigenfunctions of U looks like 11 

(A | x | A) (A\£\ A) (A | ® | A) 

(A\x \ A) (A | £ | A) (A\Z\ A) 

(A\x\A) {A\x\A) (A\x\A) 

Question 11-11 

Use Table 9.7 to evaluate the integrals in x. Is this matrix diagonal? 

Question 11-12 

Write down and evaluate the matrix representation of x 2 for the SHO with respect to the 
Hamiltonian eigenfunctions. 

Introducing this topic, I said that the matrix representation of an operator contains 
the same information as does the operator. That information concerns the observable 
represented by the operator; in effect, this operator and its various matrix representations 
(with respect to different sets of eigenfunctions) are just different ways to represent 
the observable. But operators act on functions to yield, in general, other functions, 

10 If we refer to the eigenfunctions of a Hemiitian operator as a basis, then we call the matrix R the 
matrix representation of R in the basis defined by Q. 

11 Caveat emptor. In the matrix X, the quantum number for row 1 and column I is n = 0; but according 
to matrix notation, this element is labelled xi,i, i.e.. 



So in this case the indices on each element of the matrix are not the same as the quantum numbers that define 
the element being so labelled. Such complications often arise, and it is important to keep separate in your 
mind the indices on the matrix elements and the (physical) quantum numbers that label the eigenfunctions 
in the Dirac brakets. (In the quantum physics of a single particle in three dimensions or of a many-particle 
system, the situation becomes even more complicated, for a single index usually represents the values of many 
quantum numbers.) 

504 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 






while matrices multiply other matrices to yield still other matrices. So clearly, the 
way we solve a problem in quantum physics using the matrix representations of the 
relevant observables is very different than the way we solve the same problem using 
the operator representations of these observables. The most obvious parallel between 
operator and matrix mechanics is the eigenvalue problem. For an observable Q , the 
operator eigenvalue equation, which we have discussed at length in this and the previous 
chapter, is 

QXg = QXq- 

For the matrix q the matrix eigenvalue equation is 


% = 


where \ q ]S a column vector —a matrix with only one column—that is the eigenvector 
of the matrix q with eigenvalue q. 

The Dirac formulation of quantum mechanics is powerful and beautiful, but it is 
also quite abstract. So we won’t pursue matrix representations further in this book. 


11.4 COMMUTATORS AND UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLES 


n 




In § 11.2 we proved (Proclamation 11.1) that operators that commute share simultaneous 
eigenfunctions. If the state function ^ of a system is one such eigenfunction, then the 
system is in an eigenstate of the observables represented by the commuting operators, and 
satisfies the corresponding eigenvalue equations (11.2). In such a state, both observ¬ 
ables are sharp, so their uncertainties are simultaneously zero [Eq. (11.4)]. Therefore, in 
this state simultaneous ensemble measurements of these observables yield uniquely the 
eigenvalues of (11.2). 

This means that if operators Q and R commute, then the only uncertainty relation 
satisfied by the product of their uncertainties is the obvious one 

A Q(t) A R(t) >jo, [any state # of any system] (11.53) 

which follows from the definition of the uncertainty of an observable. 

But we have seen pairs of operators whose commutator is a non-zero constant. Our 
paradigm for this case is the pair x and p , whose commutator [x,p] equals ihl. There 
exist no eigenstates of either operator, for the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 


Qo- 


Aa; A p > 

prohibits the existence of such a state. 


[any state 4* of any system] 


12 


The Generalized Uncertainty Principle 


(11.54) 


These examples hint at a connection between the commutator of two quantum-mechanical 
operators and the uncertainty relation for the corresponding observables—a connection 

12 The Dirac Della function 6(.t-.to) is an eigenfunction of x and the pure momentum function x p (.t) 
is an eigenfunction of p. For the former Ax = 0 and for the latter A p = 0. But since neither function is 
physically admissible, neither can represent a quantum state. 


Sec. 11.4 Commutators and Uncertainty Principles 505 



with profound and far-reaching consequences for laboratory measurements. Mathemat¬ 
ically, this connection is expressed by the Generalized Uncertainty Principle (GUP), 
which we’ll discuss and illustrate (but won’t prove) in this section: 13 




Generalized Uncertainty Principle 


(11.55) 


This rather forbidding inequality holds for any state of any system. Its truth hinges on 
only the definitions of the uncertainty and the expectation value and on properties of 
inequalities. 

The GUP says a mouthful. Its language is that of statistical quantities. On the left, 
we have the uncertainties 


AQ(t) = ]/{Q 2 )(t)-(Qf{t) (11.56a) 

Afl(t) = f(R?) (t)-(fl) 2 (t). (11.566) 

And on the right, we have the expectation value of the operator i[Q,R ], 14 

'(»[&£]) « = (4 1 1«[<3, H] | *) . (11.57a) 

which, for a one-dimensional wave function, is 

= i J°° *'(x,t)(QR-RQ)V(x,t)dx. (11.576) 


These statistical quantities are information concerning the (aggregate) results of simul¬ 
taneous measurements at time t of Q and R on a system in the state ^(x,t). The 
uncertainty product AQ(t) &R(t) on the left-hand side of (11.55) must be positive or 
zero; the absolute value bars on the right side ensure that it, too, is non-negative. To 
further probe the generalized uncertainty principle, let’s watch it in action. 

Example 11.3. The GUP Implies the HUP 

Suppose Q and R in (11.55) are the familiar duo x and p. Then the operator in the 
expectation value on the right-hand side of the GUP is just 

i[Q,R] = i[x,p] = i(ihi) = —hi. (11.58) 

So for these operators, the generalized uncertainty principle is 

AxAp> i \-h(V | tf)|. (11.59) 

Since the state function # is normalized, (# | \l>) = 1, and Eq. (11.59) becomes the 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, 


Ax A p > | h. 


(11.60) 


13 You can find proofs in, for example, § 6-12 of Quantum Mechanics by G. Powell and B. Crasemann 
(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1961) or in § V.8 of Elementary Quantum Mechanics by D. Saxon (San 
Francisco: Holden-Day, 1968). Fora critique of the Generalized Uncertainty Principle, see D. Deutsch, Phys. 
Rev. Lett., 50, 63 (1983). 

ll The cryptic i multiplying this commutator in the expectation value on the right-hand side of the GUP 
(11.55) is a formal nicety that ensures that the operator in this expectation value is Hcrmitian. (In Table 10.5 
1 noted that the commutator of two Hermitian operators [Q, /?] is not Hermitian, but that i [Q, J?] is.) 


506 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




Notice that nowhere in this example did I specify a particular state system. This 
simple derivation therefore proves that the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, one of the 
three great ideas of quantum physics discussed in Chap. 2, is an inevitable consequence of i 
I the postulates of quantum mechanics. Just as uncertainty in a laboratory measurement on j 
' I a microscopic system is a consequence of the wave nature of particles, so are uncertainty 
! I relations a consequence of the wave mechanics that describes their physics; both features 
| ' of the microworld are intrinsic to nature. 

State-Dependent Uncertainty Relations 


The result of applying the GUP to x and p was a clean, quite general uncertainty relation. 
But for other operators the GUP may yield more compHcated relations, expressions that 
depend explicitly on a particular quantum state. If [Q,R] is a non-zero operator not 
of the form (constant) 1, then the right-hand side of (11.55) may be zero even though 
[Q, R ] + o. This happens if for the state 'J', the matrix element {# | i[Q,R] \ V) 
happens to be zero. This situation is a little tricky and warrants examination via a 
specific example. 


Question 11-13 

Show that if $ is an eigenfunction of the operator C = i\Q, ft], then 


Example 11.4. Uncertainties in Energy and Position for the SHO 

In Question 11.8 you discovered that the Hamiltonian fl of a one-dimensional simple har¬ 
monic oscillator does not commute with the position operator x. But unlike the 

commutator of H and x is not a constant times the identity operator i; rather, it’s propor¬ 
tional to the linear momentum operator: 



[*■*]--%*■ 


(11.61) 


At first glance, you might guess that the GUP (11.55) for Q — H and R — x predicts a 
non-zero uncertainty product AE Ax. But it ain’t necessarily so. 

To obtain an expression for this product, let’s substitute (11.61) into the GUP, viz.. 




(11.62 a) 


For a state represented by ty(x,t), this uncertainty relation reads 


AE(t) As(t) > — 


'Sf*(x,t)p'H(x,t)dx 


(11.62/;) 


Clearly, if the mean value of p for the state is zero, then the uncertainty relation (11.62) 
reduces to the trivial statement that the uncertainty product AE(t) Ax(t) is not negative 
(Eq-(U-53)P- 

This happens, for example, if the state is stationary. In § 9.9 we proved that for 
the n ,h stationary state of any symmetric potential, (p) u = 0 [Eq. (9.113)]. So if we have 
= Vs ,(x)e~ iKut/h , then (p) on the right-hand side of Eqs. (11.62) is zero, and this 
inequality reduces to the uninformative utterance 


(AE), t (Ax)„ > 0. [any stationary state of the SHO] 


(11.63) 


Sec. 11.4 Commutators and Uncertainty Principles 507 



v- y 


But what if the state is not stationary? Consider, for example, a slate of the SHO that 
is a superposition of two stationary states: 


»(*,<) = -4= [Mx)e- ,E '" h + 7 ■ 


(11.64) 


[You can find the eigenfunctions ipi(x) and ip 2 {x) in Table. 9.6.] To determine the un¬ 
certainty product AE(t) Ax(/) for this state we must, according to (11.62), first evaluate 
(p) ( t ). [There is nothing new here; in Example 9.6 we calculated the mean momentum for 
a (different) non-stationary state of the SHO.] For the state (11.64), we find 


14 

(P) (0 = -gjj hp Sin loot, 


(11.65) 


where, as usual, uo is the natural frequency of the oscillator and ft = \Jmu)o/h. The 
uncertainty product for energy and position at time t is therefore governed by the relation 

AE(t) Ax(t) > sin uot (11.66a) 

50m 

i.e. t 

fr^ Q 

AE(t) Ax{t) > 0.1400 — sin u 0 t. (11.66/;) 

m 

How interesting. For this state, the mean value of p—and hence the energy-position 
uncertainty product—is not zero except at special times t, those for which <*>ot is an integral 
multiple of n, i.e., 

AE(t) Ax(t) > 0 forf=— m = 0,l,2,... (11.67) 

OJQ 

At these special discrete times, therefore, E and x could be sharp. [But even at these times, 
Eq. (11.66/;) does not necessarily reduce to an equality.] We cannot tell, however, from the 
uncertainty relation alone whether they are shaip at these times. 

Let’s verify that the uncertainty principle (11.66) is correct for this state. Doing so 
requires evaluating the left- and right-hand sides of this relation for the state (11.64)—by 
no means an impossible chore, but one that entails some algebraic contortions. Since the 
required manipulations are familiar, I won’t fill in the details; you can if you want to. 

The energy uncertainty is the square root of 



(A E) 2 = (E 2 ) - (Ef . (11.68) 

We evaluate the inevitable expectation values from the wave function (11.64) using the 
TISE, obtaining 


(E) = — hu 0 = 2.48^o. (11.69 a) 

Zo 

Notice that although the state is non-stationary, the mean value of the particle’s energy is 
independent of time. The same is true of the mean value of the square of the energy, which 
turns out to be 


(E 2 ) = 6.17h 2 u>l (11.69/;) 

Using Eqs. (11.69) in (11.68) we find that for this state of the SHO, 

(AE) 2 = 0.0196 h 2 cj% => AE = 0.1400 hu 0 . (11.70) 


508 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



Compatible and Incompatible Observables 


The moral of Example 11.4 is that there is more to uncertainty relations than one might 
first expect. Any pair of observables Q and R falls into one of three categories, depending 
on the commutator of the corresponding operators Q and R. These cases and their 
consequences are summarized in Table 11.4. 



TABLE 11.4 SUMMARY OF CONSEQUENCES OF THE GUP. 



Compatible 
[<?,«] =0 

Incompat 
[Q.fi] =cl 

ble 

[&«] =s 

simultaneous 

eigenfunctions 

exist 

don’t exist 

may exist* 

complete set of 
simultaneous 
eigenfunctions 

exists 

doesn’t exist 

doesn’t exist 

restrictions on 
uncertainties 

none 

AQ > 0 & AR > 0 

special states” 

simultaneous 

measurement 
of Q and R 

possible 

not possible 

special states* 


’Complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions prohibited. 
’’Those for which (ty | i[Q, h] | 4/) ^ 0. 

*A single (exceptional) simultaneous eigenstate may exist. 


If Q and R commute, then the observables Q and R are said to be compatible; 
otherwise they are incompatible. Simultaneous eigenstates of two or more observables 
exist if (and only if) the observables are compatible. The uncertainty relation for two 
compatible observables tells us nothing; this relation is the trivial result (11.53). The 
uncertainty relation for incompatible observables, however, may limit the precision of 
simultaneous measurements of the observables; if the commutator of Q and R is a 
constant operator, then (rigorously) no states exist in which either observable is sharp. 
But if [Q,#] is a non-constant, non-zero operator, then the limits imposed by the GUP 
depend on the state with respect to which the uncertainties are evaluated. In this case 
there does not exist a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions of Q and R , but there 
may exist one such state. 

Granted, this whole business is rather complicated. So spend a little time pondering 
Table 11.4, the examples of this section, and the marathon summary figure at the end of 
the chapter. Particularly important things to remember are: 

1. Only if two observables are compatible could we (in principle) measure their values 
simultaneously to infinite precision. 

2. Even if two observables are compatible, the system may be in a state in which onej 
or both is not sharp. 

510 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 




Similar manipulations for the expectation value of x and x 2 lead us to the po; 
uncertainty, the other factor in the product in (11.66): 


14 

( x ) (*) = coswot 


<*’> = 


62 


25 /? 2 

=*• (A.t) 2 (() = 2^2 [82 - 1.96co S 2 w 0 (] 

==>• Aa;(Q = — \Z62^T96cos‘ 2 o»o t. 
oUp 

The result of our explicit evaluation of the uncertainty product is 

AE(f) A x(t) = (0.0280)—^ - 1.96cos 2 w 0 t. 


(11.71a) 
(11.71 b) 
(11.71c) 
(11.71 d) 

(11.72) 


To illustrate the uncertainty relation (11.62), let’s consider a particular time—say, 
t = 7r/(2wo). For this time, sinwo/ = 1 and coswot = 0, and the uncertainty product 
(11.72) becomes 


AE ( i= *) = 0-2205 



For this time the right-hand side of the uncertainty relation (11.66) is 


(11.73a) 


_h_ 

2m 




0.1400 


h 2 p 


(11.73/;) 


As expected, (11,73a) is greater than (11.73/;), and the uncertainty relation is verified— 
for this particular time. (This verification does not, of course, constitute a proof of the 
generalized uncertainty principle.) 



Question 11-14 

(To be done only if you feel you need practice evaluating uncertainties and expectation 
values.) Fill in the steps leading to Eqs. (11.73). [In Chap. 12 we’ll learn a very easy way 
to evaluate expectation values of E and its powers; you might want to wait to fill in the 
steps of this example until then.] 


Aside: The Implications for Measurement. Our explicit results for the energy and 
position uncertainties shed some light on the question of what would happen were we 
to measure these observables at one of the special times t = mn/wo, m = 0,1,2,..., 
when the uncertainty relation reduces to Eq. (11.67). At these times, coswo t = 1, 
so the position uncertainty equals the constant 1.55//?. The energy uncertainty is i 
independent of time and so is equal to 0.1400 hwo. Both uncertainties are non-zero, 

-so even at-these special times neither energy nor position are sharp—a fact we could— 
not have deduced from the uncertainty relation (11.67). 

Question 11-15 

Argue from the form of the state function that at no time could the position and energy 
uncertainties be zero. 


Sec. 11.4 Commutators and Uncertainty Principles 509 



11.5 CONSTANTS OF THE MOTION IN CLASSICAL AND 
QUANTUM PHYSICS 




In several pairs of observables that we’ve examined, one was the total energy E. Any 
observable that is compatible with E has a special status in quantum mechanics and is 
called a constant of the motion. By definition, an observable Q is a constant of the 
motion if the operator that represents it, Q , commutes with the operator that represents 
the energy, 7 i: 


[«,<?] =0 


Q is a constant of the motion 


(11.74) 


You have learned (or, depending on your curriculum, you will learn) about constants 
of the motion of a macroscopic system in a classical mechanics course, where these 
quantities are sometimes called “first integrals of the motion.” But a constant of the 
motion for a microscopic system is a very different sort of creature, and the difference 
highlights a fundamental contrast between classical and quantum physics. This contrast, 
which will now become the dominant theme of this chapter, will ultimately return us to 
the Correspondence Principle, which connects classical and quantum physics. 


Constants of the Motion of a Macroscopic System 


In dealing with a complicated many-particle macroscopic system (twelve billiard balls 
on a table, for example) we usually cannot solve the classical equations of motion for 
the trajectories (r,(£), p,(£), i = 1,2,3,... } N] of all N particles. But we can still 
investigate the physics of the system, by focusing on particular observables, functions of 
r,- and p ? , whose values do not change as the system evolves. These special observables 
are the classical constants of the motion of the system. 

The most familiar constant of the motion is the total energy. For a single macro¬ 
scopic particle in one dimension (one billiard ball on a wire), the energy is a func¬ 
tion of x and p and is sometimes written as the classical Hamiltonian H(x,p) — i.e ., 
E = H(x,p) = p 2 /(2m) + V(x). As time passes, the energy doesn’t change. In fact, 
we can prove (from Newton’s Second Law) that 

dV dE 

—— = 0 -r- = 0. [classical physics] (11.75) 

ot dt 

Consequently E = H(x,p) is a constant of the motion— i.e ., as has been known 
since 1847, the total energy of a conservative system is conserved. 15 So in classical 
physics knowledge of the constants of the motion leads to conservation laws. Not 
unexpectedly, the same is true in quantum physics (§ 11.6). 

Clearly the classical definition of a constant of the motion won’t wash in quantum 
physics, because at no time can we precisely specify the position and the linear momen¬ 
tum (the trajectory) of a microscopic system. To clarify this difficulty, let’s consider a 
specific state—say, a non-stationary state of a simple harmonic oscillator [e.g., (11.64)]. 


15 Notice that I specified that V does not depend on t, thereby limiting this discussion to conservative 
systems. In classical as in quantum physics, the energy of a non-conservative system in an arbitrary state is 
not conserved. For a discussion of constants of the motion and conservation laws in classical physics, see 
Chap. 1 and § 2.6 of Classical Mechanics , 2nd ed. by H. Goldstein (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1980) 
or Chap. 2 of Classical Dynamics of Panicles and Systems, 2nd ed. by J. B. Marion (New York: Academic 
Press, 1970.) 


Sec. 11.5 Constants of the Motion in Classical and Quantum Physics 511 





Such a state does not have an energy, a position, or a linear momentum, for none of these 
observables are sharp. So the classical description of one or another of these quantities 
as a "constant of the motion” is meaningless. To use this concept, we must re-define it 
in a way that is appropriate to the microworld and, yet, that remains consistent with the 
classical definition in the classical limit. As you’ll see, Eq. (11.74) is the definition we 
need. 


Constants of the Motion of a Microscopic System 

The first thing to notice about the definition (11.74) is that it makes sense. If Ti and Q 
commute, then there exist simultaneous eigenstates of energy and Q. In such a state, the 
energy and Q are sharp; i.e., their uncertainties, as calculated from at any time, 

are zero. Hence a measurement of Q will yield the eigenvalue q of ^(x,t) regardless 
of when the measurement is performed ; i.e., Q has a well-defined value that does not 
change as the system evolves. It is certainly reasonable to call such an observable a 
“constant of the motion.” 

If you’ll flip back through this chapter, you’ll find a couple of examples of constants 
of the motion for various systems: the linear momentum of a free particle, and the parity 
of a particle with a symmetric potential. And you’ll see why the momentum of the 
simple harmonic oscillator is not a constant of the motion. 

Question 11-16 

Is position a constant of the motion for a SHO? ... for a symmetric square well? ... for 
an asymmetric square well? Explain your answer in each case. 


Question 11-17 

Prove that the energy of any conservative system is a constant of the motion of the system. 
(This exercise is easy and very important. Do it.) 


Question 11-18 

Consider an electron in a hydrogen atom that is exposed to an external electromagnetic 
wave of frequency w 0 and electric field strength So. One term in the potential energy of 
this electron is 


V'(x,y, z) = eSozcosuot. 

Is the total energy of the electron a constant of the motion? Why or why not? 

The Importance of Constants of the Motion 

What are the consequences for the wave functions of the fact that constants of the motion 
exist? Because ft commutes with the operator Q that represents a constant of the motion, 
there exists a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions of these operators, {^E,q{x)}. 
These simultaneous eigenfunctions describe the spatial dependence of stationary-state 
wave functions of the system, viz., 

01.76) 

512 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



Such a wave function represents a simultaneous eigenstate of E and Q\ it is separable 
because it is an eigenfunction of H. 

Constants of the motion are important in quantum mechanics primarily because 
they define the quantum numbers that we use to label stationary states of systems such 
as atoms, molecules, solids, and nuclei. These are the states between which transitions 
occur in spectroscopic experiments. And they are the initial and final states of targets in 
collision experiments. To detennine these vital constants of the motion we must find a 
set of operators that commute with one another and with the Hamiltonian. The operators 
must commute with H so that in stationary states, the observables they represent could 
be sharp. They must commute with one another so that in these states, they all could 
simultaneously be shaip. So a facility with commutators and simultaneous eigenfunctions 
is an essential skill of any physicist. 

Aside: Constants of the Motion for Three-Dimensional Systems. Finding the 
constants of the motion is not an urgent matter in the study of one-ditnensional 
microscopic systems, for we can uniquely identify the (non-degenerate) bound-states 
of such systems by the single quantum number that labels the energies. Additional 
labels are redundant. 

But for three-dimensional systems, where most bound-state energies are de¬ 
generate, the energy quantum number alone is not sufficient to uniquely specify a 
quantum state. One or more additional labels are needed. These labels correspond to 
observables that are shaip in the stationary states so labelled and hence to constants 
of the motion. 

For example, one of the simplest realistic three-dimensional systems is the 
hydrogen atom (one electron and one proton). All bound-state energies except the 
ground-state energy are degenerate, and the stationary-state wave functions for the 
bound states are usually (but not necessarily) labelled by quantum numbers corre¬ 
sponding to the energy, the square of the orbital angular momentum of the electron 
with respect to the proton, and the projection of this angular momentum along one 
space-fixed axis (usually e z ). The latter two observables correspond to the operators 
L 2 and L z \ and using their quantum numbers to label stationary states is legitimate 
only because these observables commute with H. (To uniquely specify a state of an 
electron in a hydrogen atom, one must also specify the orientation of another, purely 
quantum-mechanical angular momentum called the electron spin. We’ll study spin in 
Volume II.) 

To close this section, let’s summarize the results we expect in a simultaneous 
measurement of E and a constant of the motion Q. If the system is in a simultaneous 
eigenstate of these observables, then 


A E(t) = 01 
(E)(t) = El 

AQ(<) = O'! 
«?>(<) = <7 J 


at any time t 


at any time t 


state is stationary (11 11a) 

Q is a constant of the motion. (1 \Jlb) 


The statement that an observable is constant in time sounds like a classical conservation 
law. But Eqs. (11.77) certainly don’t look much like such laws, which are usually 
expressed in terms of time derivatives, as in Eq. (11.75). In fact, quantum mechanics 
does yield laws of this form, and they are equivalent to Eqs. (11.77). To see how to 
derive them, we must first consider the evolution of an arbitrary observable, which is the 


Sec. 11.5 Constants of the Motion in Classical and Quantum Physics 513 




topic of the next section. So don’t stop reading yet; you’ve only heard part of the tale 
of constants of the motion in quantum physics. 


11.6 CONSERVATION LAWS IN QUANTUM PHYSICS 

You have probably noticed that in quantum mechanics we often find ourselves questioning 
concepts we have lived with for years, re-defining familiar notions so they can be applied 
to the uncertain microscopic universe. 

Consider, for example, the statement “the observable Q is conserved.” In classical 
physics, this declaration means simply that the value of Q does not change with time. 
Conservation of Q is a property of the system ; it holds for any state (i.e., any trajectory). 
For a single macroscopic particle in one dimension, the simplest classical system, the 
definition of a conserved quantity is 



This is the fonn of a conservation law in classical physics. 

The energy of an isolated macroscopic system, for example, does not change as the 
system evolves, regardless of the trajectories of the constituent particles. A measurement 
of the energy—or of any other conserved observable—yields the same value no matter 
when it is performed. 

But for a microscopic system we cannot define a conserved observable as one 
whose value in any state does not change with time, because for any observable Q there 
exist quantum states in which the observable does not have a value —namely, those in 
which A Q > 0. 

The difficulty with the classical definition (11.78) is vividly illustrated by the sim¬ 
plest microscopic system: a free particle in one dimension (Chap. 4). For any physically 
admissible wave function, any wave packet, the energy, position, and momentum of the 
particle are uncertain, so in no state does a free particle have a value of E, of x, or 
of p. It is clearly nonsense, then, to ask if “the value of E or x or p” is independent 
of time. Yet, we expect the energy of a free particle to be conserved, for no external 
influences act on the particle to induce a change in this observable. We need, clearly, a 
new definition of a conserved quantity. 

Conserved Quantities for Microscopic Systems 



Our definition should express the time independence of some measurable quantity, so we 
won’t consider definitions expressed directly in terms of the operator, such as dQ/dt = 0. 
And our definition must not depend on a particular state of the system. A sensible way 
to define a conserved quantity is: one whose mean value in any state does not change 
as the system evolves, i.e.. 


-- {Q ) ( t ) = 0 for any state 
dt 


Q is conserved 
(quantum physics) 


(11.79) 


514 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 





Note that we must add the qualifier “for any 
expectation value { Q ) is state dependent. For 
definition reads 16 

Note carefully that to prove that an observable 
one state that violates (11.79). 

Aside: Conservation Laws and the Correspondence Principle. Using ( Q ) to 
define a conserved observable is also suggested by the Correspondence Principle. 
According to § 5.7, the transition between quantum and classical physics is made via 
expectation values [,?«look at Eqs. (5.86)]. So by defining a conserved observable for 
a quantum system by (11.79) we set ourselves up to regain the corresponding classical 
conservation law (11.78) in the classical limit—a satisfying connection we’ll explore 
in § 11.7. 

Conserved Quantities and Constants of the Motion 


state w” to this definition, because the 
a single particle in one dimension, this 

'£*(a;,£)Q\Ii r (a;,f) dx = 0. (11.80) 

Q is not conserved, you need find only 


In practice, the definition (11.79) suffers from its state dependence. Were we to apply it 
literally to an observable Q , we’d have to evaluate ( Q} = (\P | Q | 4>) for all states \P, 
checking each expectation value for time dependence. This definition is not wrong, it’s 
just awkward to apply. But there is a deeper reason than mere inconvenience why it is 
less than ideal. 

Whether or not an observable is conserved, in quantum as in classical physics, is 
a property of the observable and, via the Hamiltonian, of the system dynamics. So we 
should be able to define this property without reference to states of the system. [Recall 
that in Chap. 10 we freed the definition of Hermiticity, another property of operators, 
from its dependence on state functions in Eq. (10.24), by introducing the adjoint (§ 10.4) 
in Eq. (10.57).] 

In classical physics the conserved observables of a system are its constants of the 
motion. Similarly, as we’ll now prove, a conserved observable in quantum mechanics is 
a constant of the motion, i.e., is one whose operator commutes with H: 


[H,<3] =0 


5«>W“ 0 


for all 4/ 


(11.81) 


The commutation relation \ii, Q ] = 0 is the state-independent expression of the status 
of Q as a conserved observable. To prove (11.81) we must back off for a moment 
from conserved observables and consider the evolution of the mean value of an arbitrary 
Hermitian operator. 


_L (i You may be wondering if we could define a conserved observable in terms of some other measurable 
quantity, such as the probability for obtaining a particular value in a measurement of the observable. The 
trouble with such a definition is that it would be unwieldy, because to encompass all possible outcomes we 
would have to require constancy of the probabilities for all values that could be obtained in the measurement. 
But from these probabilities we can always calculate (Q) (see § 3.3 and 3.6), so the more convenient definition 
(11.79) is preferable. Moreover, as noted, this definition facilitates the transition to classical physics. [In the 
next chapter, we’ll discover that if Q is conserved according to (11.79), then the probabilities for all possible 
outcomes of measurement of Q are independent of time. So all this hangs together.] 


Sec. 11.6 Conservation Laws in Quantum Physics 515 




7 


The Time Development of an Expectation Value 


Let Q be an arbitrary Hermitian operator—it may even depend on time [c.f., the potential 
energy in Question 11.18]. The first derivative of the expectation value of any such 
operator is given by Eq. (11.80). Our first step in deriving a more convenient expression 
for this quantity is to move the time derivative inside the integral. 17 When we pull this 
switch, we must change the total derivative to a partial derivative, because this derivative 
now acts on functions of time and spatial variables, e.g. t 




d_ 

dt 




dx. 


(11.82) 


Expanding this partial derivative, we obtain 



(11.83) 


Note the presence in the second tenn on the right-hand side of Eq. (11.83) of the partial 
derivative of Q with respect to time. This term allows for the possibility that Q depends 
explicitly on time. 18 

I want next to focus on the first and third terms on the right-hand side of (11.83), 
so I’ll separate out the term involving dQ/d^j, writing it as an expectation value, and 
will temporarily move it to the left-hand side of the equation, viz., 


_d 

dt 



Q'J' + 'T 



dx. 


(11.84) 


Now, to derive a useful expression from (11.84) we must get rid of the partial derivatives 
in it. We faced a similar labor in Chap. 6 when deriving the rate equation for probability 
flow, Eq. (6.113) (§ 6.8). There we used the Time-Dependent Schrodinger Equation to 
eliminate the first partial time derivative of ^(x,f) by writing 


dt 

dV* 

dt 



Using the same trick on (11.84), we obtain 


(1 1.85a) 
(11.85 b) 




i 

h 

i 

h 


[(Hf I Q$) - ($ I QK4 1 )]. 


dx (1 
(1 


1.86r/) 
1.86/;) 


17 I haven’t been picky about mathematical rigor in this book, but I should note here that this step is 
legitimate because of the continuity of 4* and its first derivative, and because the limits of integration in (11.80) 
are constant. 

18 Actually, this possibility is unlikely; such explicit time dependence occurs rarely in quantum- 
mechanical operators. But it does show up in the response of microscopic systems to applied external fields, 
a matter we’ll leave for Volume II. 


516 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



We can now use the Henniticity of H to prepare the first Dirac braket in (11.86/?) to be 
combined with the second, viz.. 


I(«w> - (f K [<* i*o»m*i<w*>] 

*>• 


= -(<H\HQ-QH 


(11.87a) 
(11.87/?) 


We instantly recognize the right-hand side of Eq. (11.87 b) as the commutator 
[H, 0]* So the rate of change of the expectation value of an arbitrary Hermitian operator 
is 




( 11 . 88 ) 


Question 11-19 

Use the general result (11.88) to prove that the normalization of an arbitrary state function 
is independent of time, i.e.. 

This is, of course, not a new result—we proved it in Chap. 6 using a different stratagem. 


Summary and Return to Classical Conservation Laws 


If, as is usually the case, the operator Q does not explicitly depend on time, then 



(11.89) 


in which case the equation that governs the evolution of the expectation value of Q is 
simply 



d_ 

dt 


«> = ±<i [*,<}]) 


[Q independent of t] 


(11.90) 


This equation pertains to all the operators we have studied thus far (to H, x , p, ft) and 
to most of those whose acquaintance we’ll make in Volume II. 19 

19 There is a rather advanced formulation of classical mechanics that leads to an equation of motion 
strikingly analogous to the quantum-mechanical result (11.88). This formulation involves a classical quantity 
called a Poisson bracket. For a classical observable Q[xt(QiPt(Q;i = 1,2,... , ;Y] = Q(t) that pertains to 
a (one-dimensional) system of N macroscopic particles whose classical Hamiltonian is H, the Poisson bracket 
is defined as 


(Q, H} = y - ) . Poisson bracket of Q and H 

\axi dpi dpi axiJ 

i=i 

The rate of change of the observable Q(f) can be expressed in tenns of the Poisson bracket of Q and H as 

>) = f + «.*}• 

This equation looks very like (11.88); but all quantities in it are functions, not operators. 


Sec. 11.6 Conservation Laws in Quantum Physics 517 





Now suppose Q is a constant of the motion of the system with Hamiltonian H. 
Then, by the definition (11.74), \ii, <§J = 0. Ergo the right-hand side of (11.90) is 
zero and, according to the definition (11.79), Q is conserved. This little argument proves 
Eq. (11.81). Its point is that you’ll find it much easier to determine whether or not a given 
observable is conserved by evaluating the commutator of its operator and the Hamiltonian 
rather than by checking all possible expectation values for time dependence. 


i 


Example 11.5. The Parity Operator 

We have already demonstrated that the parity operator fl commutes with the Hamiltonian 
of a system whose potential energy is symmetric. Hence parity is a constant of the motion 
and, according to (11.81), is conserved, i.e.. 


— (n) = 0for all 


[conservation of parity] 


(11.91) 


But if V(x) is not symmetric (e.g., for the asymmetric square well of Fig. 9.7), then 
, ft] 7 ^ 0, and parity is not conserved. 

The conservation of parity for submicroscopic physical systems was an issue that, a 
few years ago, generated a lot of controversy (and a Nobel prize); we’ll look briefly at its 
history in the last section of this chapter. 


Example 11.6. Conservation of Energy 

One of the most important laws in physics is conservation of energy. According to the 
definition (11.79), the observable E is conserved if 


-f- CH) = 0 for any state 4* 
at 


conservation of energy 


(11.92) 


Evidently, Eq. (11.92) holds for a stationary state, since for such a state the expectation 
value 


(H) = \H | tf) = ($|W) (11.93) 

is simply equal to the sharp energy of the state, E. But that’s not good enough; to prove 
that energy is conserved we must verify (11.92) for any state, stationary or non-stationary. 

But how much easier to use the alternate formulation in (11.81): any operator com¬ 
mutes with itself, so [7f, ft\ = 0. This implies (11.92), i.e., that the energy is conserved. 

Still, there’s a subtle feature to this proof. In it, we assumed that H did not explicitly 
depend on time. What happens if V = V(x,t)l Using our general result (11.88) we find 

!<*>«=(w 

i 

—As expected, the energy of a non-conservative microscopic system (one whose potential- 
i depends on t) is not conserved. 

1 I 

In Chap. 12 we’ll investigate further the consequences of an observable being 
conserved; but we’ve already discovered the essential features. The crucial mathematical 
and physics statements of § 11 . 5 - 11.6 are summarized in the following handy diagram: 


[for a time-dependent potential] 


(11.94) 


518 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 





constant of the motion — 

-* conserved observable 

1 

r - 

1 

d , , 

1 

o 

II 

cT 

-» — ( Q ) = 0 for all ^ 

at 


Question 11-20 

Supose the initial state of a quantum system at t = 0) is an eigenstate of a constant of 
the motion Q. Time passes, and the system evolves (but no measurements are performed 
on it). Is for t > 0 an eigenfunction of Q1 Why or why not? 

I began this section by discussing conservation laws in classical physics; we write 
these laws in terms of observables that are represented by functions of time. We’ve now 
seen the nature of the corresponding laws of quantum physics: we write these laws in 
terms of the expectation values of observables that are represented by operators. The 
transition between a quantum-mechanical conservation law and its classical counterpart 
is fairly straightforward, since according to Eqs. (5.85) 


Correspondence Principle (11.96) 


But the Correspondence Principle is not limited to conservation laws. Perhaps all 
laws in quantum mechanics, if expressed in terms of expectation values, can be related 
through the Correspondence Principle, to their classical counterparts. Indeed they can, 
as we’ll see in the next section. 


(Q)(t) 

Q(t ) 

AQ(t) 

ii the classical limit Q 


1)7 PHYSICAL LAWS AND THE CORRESPONDENCE 
PRINCIPLE 

... listen. The sound of physics. 
The soft, breathless whir of Now. 

Just listen. 

Close your eyes, pay attention: 
Murder, wouldn’t you say? 

A purring electron? Photons, protons? 
Yes, and the steady hum 
of a balanced equation. 

— from The Nuclear Age (A Novel) 
by Tim O’Brian 


The bedrock of classical mechanics is Newton’s Second Law of Motion, popularly known 
(for a single particle in one dimension) as 

F = ma. (11.97) 

You have probably seen an alternate form of this law, in which it is written in terms of 
the linear momentum, 

p(t) = m— x (t), (11.98) 


Sec. 11.7 Physical Laws and the Correspondence Principle 519 





(11.99) 


and the potential energy V(x,t), which is related to the force by 

F{x,t) = --^ v (x,t). 

Using these equations and a = dp(t)/dt in (11.97), we can easily derive this alternate 
form of Newton’s Second Law, an expression for the rate of change of the momentum 
function p(t): 


=-&(*.*)-**■*) 


[classical physics] 


( 11 . 100 ) 


We can also easily derive the corresponding equation for the rate of change of the position 
function x(t), Eq. (11.98), viz., 20 


4*(o = 

dt m 


[classical physics] 


( 11 . 101 ) 


According to the Correspondence Principle (11.96), we retrieve classical observ¬ 
ables, such as x(t) and p(t), in the classical limit from the expectation values of the 
corresponding operators, such as (x) (t) and (p) (i). The classical laws (11.100) and 
(11.101) describe the evolution of the observables in this limit, while quantum laws 
derived from the general evolution equation (11.88) describe changes in the expectation 
values. What are these quantum laws? And do they indeed translate into the correspond¬ 
ing classical laws in the classical limit? 

Ehrenfest’s Theorem 


These provocative questions were answered in 1927 by the Austrian physicist Paul Ehren- 
fest (1880-1933). Ehrenfest was a member of the “second generation” of founders of 
quantum mechanics. He was a friend of Albert Einstein (a leader of the first generation) 
and shared Einstein’s interests in the foundations of quantum theory and its relationship 
to thennodynamics and to statistical physics. 

In a paper published in a 1927 issue of the distinguished German journal Zeitschrift 
fur Physik [45, 455 (1927)], Ehrenfest proved “by a short elementary calculation without 
approximations” that for a single particle (in one dimension) 


( 11 . 102 ) 


20 One reason for rewriting Newton’s law in the form of Eqs. (11.100) and (11.101) is that these 
equations highlight the functions that make up the trajectory, x(t) and p(t). Equations (11.100) and (11.101) 
are called Hamilton's equations (yes, the same Hamilton) and are often written in terms of the classical 
Hamiltonian H(x, p, t) as 

4 x ( t ) = P.0 

dt dp 

4) = ~H(x,p,t). 
dt dx 

If you’re interested, take a minute to convince yourself that these are identical to (11.100) and (11.101) for a 
classical Hamiltonian H(x,p,t) = T(p) + V^x, t). 


d . , , . 

f dV\ 

<1 

s< p)W = < 

\~dx )' 

Ehrenfest’s Theorem (one dimension) 

n 


520 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 





This is the quantum-mechanical analog of Newton’s Second Law, Eq. (11.100): it relates 
the rate of change of the momentum to the slope of the potential energy (/>., to the force) 
for a state of the system. Ehrenfest went on to show that in the classical limit, this result 
reduces to its classical counterpart. 21 

The impact of Ehrenfest’s research on the physics community in the early thirties 
was enormous. Physicists thought, quite reasonably, that if this upstart new quantum 
theory was correct, then not only its physical quantities but also its physical laws must 
reduce to those of classical physics in the appropriate limit. Ehrenfest’s work therefore 
contributed greatly to the acceptance of Schrodinger’s theory. 

Newton’s Second Law Regained (Almost) 


We’ll prove Ehrenfest’s Theorem in two stages. First, we will develop the quantum- 
mechanical counterpart of the classical equation for the rate of change of position , 
Eq. (11.101). Then we’ll tackle the rate of change of momentum, which will lead 
us to Ehrenfest’s analog of Newton’s Second Law. 

The rate of change of ( x) ( t ) is given by Eq. (11.88) as 


It (*> = £(<[*.*]). (11.103) 

since dx/dt = 0. Conveniently, the commutator we need appears in Table 11.3: 

r* i iTl 

\n,x] = — p. (n.104) 

1 J m 

Substituting this commutator into (11.103) we easily obtain 


at m 


(11.105) 


whose resemblance to (11.101) I need hardly mention. 

To evaluate the rate of change of (p) we pull the same trick. The evolution equation 
for this observable is 

!<P>-£(<[*.*])• (11.106) 

In Table 11.3 we find the commutator 

c)\f 

[n,p]=ih~i. (n.107) 

This result leads us immediately to 



(11.108) 


21 But Ehrenfest did not formulate his theorem in terms of expectation values. Rather he discussed 
the evolution of the mean value of the linear momentum in terms of averages over wave packets. Equation 
(11.101) is a “translation” of his finding into the lingo of modem quantum mechanics. The year following 
publication of Ehrenfest’s paper, A. E. Ruark showed how to extend it to N-particle systems [Phys. Rev., 31, 
533 (1928)]. 


Sec. 11.7 Physical Laws and the Correspondence Principle 521 




Now, by identifying the first derivative of the potential with the force [Eq. (11.100)] 
and taking the derivative of (p) via Eq. (11.105), we can turn (11.108) into 


m^(x)(t) = (F(x,t)). (11.109) 

At first glance, this looks very much like Newton’s Second Law, Eq. (11.100). But 
they’re not the same. Not yet. 

Can you see the difference? Ponder carefully the expectation value of the force. 
For a state ^ this quantity is 



^*(x, t)F(x , t)^l(x, t) dx 



^(a:, t) dx. 


( 11 . 110 ) 


The difference is that (F) ( t ) on the right-hand side of (11.109) is not necessarily equal 
to F((x)(t)). To appreciate the importance of this difference, consider what would 
happen to Eq. (11.108) if, as is the case for some systems, these quantities happened to 
be equal: 

<F)(t) = F( <*)(()) => j t (p) (t) = F((x) (<)). (11.111) 

In this special case, the quantum-mechanical equations that govern the evolution of the 
expectation values (x) ( t ) and (p) ( t ) have precisely the same form as the classical laws 
for x(t) and p(t). 

“But,” you ask, “isn’t the relevant question whether (x) (£) and (p) ( t ) evolve 
according to the laws of classical physics in the classical limit?" 

Right you are. And in this limit, all is well, for 22 


£ 


•V(x,t)F(x, t)V(x, t)dx 


Ax- 

(x)(0- 


► 0 
>x(t) 


F((x)(t)). 


( 11 . 112 ) 


This is the essence of Ehrenfest’s theorem: 

Rule 

In the classical limit, the equations that describe the time development of ( x ) (t) and {p) ( t) 
are identical to the equations of Newtonian mechanics. 


Notice that the mathematical form of Eq. (11.105) for d (x) (t)/dt is identical to that of 
Eq. (11.101) for dx(t)/dt. And, as I remarked above, for certain systems (such as the 
simple harmonic oscillator), Eq. (11.108) for d(p) ( t)/dt is identical in form to (11.100) 
for dp{t)/dt. But the peculiar structure of Eq. (11.109) for an arbitrary potential throws 
a monkey wrench into the works, which we can get rid of only by taking the classical 
limit. 


22 Remember that in the classical limit the spatial extent of P(x,t) = *P*(t,0^'(- T > t) is negligible 
(for the duration of any measurement). Mathematically speaking, this is a statement of spatial localization. 
For example, if the center of P{x,t) occurs at .to, then in the classical limit this function can be replaced by 
the Dirac Delta function 6{x - to) with no loss of accuracy. 


522 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



Question 11-21 

Demonstrate that the form of the classical and quantum equations for evolution of position 
and its expectation value are identical for a simple harmonic oscillator, i.e., that 

(F(x,t)) = F((x) («)) for V{x) = Imufix' 2 . (11.113) 


Question 11-22 

Demonstrate that (11.112) follows in the classical limit As(Q —» 0. 

Question 11-23 

Show why we run into trouble if the potential depends on a power of x higher than the 
second by demonstrating that 

(F(x, t)) ± F((x) (i)) for V(a’) a x 3 . (11.114) 


Just What IS the Relationship of Quantum to Classical 
Physics? 

The equations we’ve derived for the time development of the mean values of position and 
momentum add a remarkable new dimension to the Correspondence Principle, revealing 
that the connection of classical and quantum physics is deeper than we heretofore per¬ 
ceived. From Chap. 5 we knew that statistical properties, which must be used to describe 
an observable in quantum mechanics, go over correctly in the classical limit to functions 
of time, which describe the observable in classical physics. But now we have discov¬ 
ered that the relationships between these statistical properties —in particular between the 
expectation values of the fundamental observables, position and momentum—also go 
over into the corresponding relationships of classical physics. So the laws of nature in 
quantum mechanics are, in this sense, consonant with those of classical physics. 23 

Still, as satisfying as this consonance is, it is not quite as profound as you might 
think. There is a sense in which we implicitly assumed Ehrenfest’s theorem when we 
set up our postulates in Part II. The operator postulate (Postulate III, Chap. 5) prescribes 
that quantum-mechanical operators, such as ft, shall be constructed from classical ob¬ 
servables, such as T + V(x ) t). This assumption leads inexorably (if circuitously) to 
Ehrenfest’s theorem. 

So the Correspondence Principle leaves certain aspects of the relationship between 
quantum mechanics and Newtonian mechanics a bit vague. The implications of this 


23 There is another way to retrieve the laws of classical physics written in a form that looks like the 
commutator-infested equations of this chapter. In an earlier footnote I introduced the Poisson brackets for two 
classical observables Q and R. We can recast the laws of classical physics in terms of these brackets, arriving 
at results such as the following expressions for the derivatives of an arbitrary observable Q(a:(t),p(£)]: 


dQ 

dp 






Regardless of the particular classical law you are working with, you can obtain from it the corresponding 
quantum-mechanical equation by merely replacing the Poisson brackets by the commutator of the relevant 
observables, appropriately scaled: 


replace {<?,/?} by “[<?.£] 

For more on Poisson brackets, see § 9.4ff of Classical Mechanics, 2nd ed. by H. Goldstein (Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley, 1980). 


Sec. 11.7 Physical Laws and the Correspondence Principle 523 



ambiguity have been well expressed by Daniel T. Gillespie in his fine book A Quantum 
Mechanics Primer (London: International Textbook, 1973) (p.l 13): 

... it is not altogether clear just what the precise logical relationship is between 
classical and quantum mechanics. ... we ourselves as the ultimate observers of any 
physical system, are essentially classical objects, in that our sense can directly perceive 
only macroscopic phenomena (e.g., dial readings, instrument settings, etc). This fact 
probably places severe restrictions not only on what things we can perceive about a 
microscopic system, but also on how we interpret what we perceive. 

We shall return to this issue in Chap. 13, where we directly confront the Problem of 
Measurement. 

Aside: A Philosophical Note. Before we leave the Correspondence Principle, 1 
want to add a note on “quantum epistemology.” Discussions of this principle seduce 
some readers into the impression that quantum mechanics somehow subsumes classi¬ 
cal physics, that it is more fundamental and obviates the need for classical mechanics 
in physical theory. This is wrong. Although some physicists have tried to conjure up 
an interpretation of quantum mechanics that does describe everything, 24 the prevail¬ 
ing view is that a dual description is unavoidable, that neither quantum mechanics 
nor classical mechanics alone describes the physical universe. The reasons for this 
necessary dualism require an appreciation of subtle features of the Correspondence 
Principle that we haven’t the space to discuss; 25 suffice it to say here that the many 
possibilities inherent in the (Copenhagen) description of a microscopic system do 
not always go over smoothly into a single actuality, a necessary characteristic of a 
classical description. 


* 11.8 THE STRANGEST "UNCERTAINTY RELATION" 

OF THEM ALL 

“The tragedy of science is 

the heartless murder of beautiful theories 

by ugly facts.” 

—John Bishop 
in Artifact 

by Gregory Benford 


All of the elements of quantum mechanics that we have investigated in this chapter— 
commutators, simultaneous eigenfunctions, uncertainty relations, conservation laws— 
interlock via the theorems and equations we have discussed. In the flow chart in Fig. 11.2, 
I have attempted to summarize and systematize this maze of connections. Many of these 
elements come together in the definition and derivation of the “energy-time uncertainty 
relation,” which for reasons I’ll explain in a minute, I prefer to call the energy-time 
inequality: 

AE At >f. (11.115) 

24 Such as the many-world interpretation of H. Event and the hidden variable theories of D. Bohm and 
others. For a low-key, accessible introduction to these matters, see Chaps. 9, 12, and 13 of Quantum Reality: 
Beyond the New Physics by N. Herbert (New York: Anchor Press, 1985). 

25 A useful overview is provided by C. H. Woo in a paper in Amec. Jour. Phys., 54, 923 (1986). 


524 


Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



Special case: [ H, Q] = 0 



Q is a constant 


Stationary states 

of the motion 


in which Q is 



sharp exit 

— (Q) = 0 
dt 


*e. q = i>E. q e~ iEt ‘ h 



See §11.7 


Figure 11.2 A marathon summary of the relationships between the elements of quantum 
mechanics examined in Chap. 11. 


I commented on this relation at various places in Part II, and if you worked 
Pblm. 4.2 you should have a fairly good intuitive sense of its origin and meaning. This 
inequality is subtle, even for an uncertainty relation, but we now have the background 
to define its terms and understand its content. That content is of considerable practical 
import, for, as you’ll see at the end of this section, the energy-time inequality finds 
application in describing the stationary states of atoms. 

The first thing to notice about Eq. (11.115) is that it’s not an uncertainty relation — 
at least not in the sense that we have been using the phrase. Think about time. In 
quantum mechanics, time is not an observable; it is a parameter. We may choose to 
investigate a quantum state at one or another time, but we cannot measure time as we 
can energy or position. And there is no operator t in quantum mechanics. So what is 
meant by “the uncertainty in time A£”? If by A t we mean to imply use of the usual 
definition of uncertainty, AQ = [(Q) 2 - (Q 2 )] 1 ^ 2 , then this symbol means nothing. 

Time for a Change 

The question of the meaning of At in the inequality (11.115) takes us once again to 
the heart of quantum physics: measurement. This inequality has to do with change in a 
quantum state. The issue it addresses is: how much time must elapse before we can say 
that a system has changed? As I have remarked several times, in quantum mechanics we 


Sec. 11.8 The Strangest “Uncertainty Relation” of Them All 525 












deal with such matters in a very pragmatic context—restricting ourselves to statements 
that can be quantified via experiment: 


Rule 

To measure a change in a system, we must detect in an experiment a change in an observable 
of the system. 


For example, one way to observe that there has been a change in the state of an 
ensemble that was initially in, say, a stationary state with energy E n is to detect the 
photons emitted when the members undergo transitions to another, lower-lying state. 
(The transition may occur of its own accord, as in the spontaneous decay of an atom 
from an excited state, or by absorption of a photon, or in response to a collision with 
another microscopic particle, such as an electron.) 

Defining a “measurable change” in a property of a microscopic system is a bit 
tricky, because such a definition must accommodate states in which the property is 
uncertain. But regardless of the state, the results of measurement of the observable can 
be described en masse by the expectation value (Q). So we would be confident that 
an uncertain observable Q has actually changed were we to observe that its mean value 
(Q) has changed by (at least) the uncertainty A Q. The time required for a change of 
this magnitude to occur is the quantity we call At. 26 So only after a time interval A t 
could we (in principle) say whether or not a property of the system has changed. (Actual 
times involved in measuring changes in the laboratory are much larger than the minimum 
allowed by the energy-time inequality.) 

Let us now put this definition on a quantitative footing. The rate of change of (Q) 
is d { Q ) jdt. So the time required for ( Q ) to change from its initial value (at t = 0) by 
an amount AQ(0) (the uncertainty evaluated at t = 0) is 27 


At- AQ 


\MQ)\ 

1=0 


(11.116) 


According to the energy-time inequality, the minimum time required to measure a change 
in any observable is related to the uncertainty in the energy of the particle by Eq. (11.115). 
On the face of it, this claim seems quite remarkable: why should the uncertainty in the 
energy control how long it takes to measure a change in some other observable? Let’s 
see. 



Derivation of the Energy-Time Inequality 

To develop an expression for the product of the energy uncertainty and the “change time” 
(11.116), we start with a more conventional uncertainty relation: the inequality for the 


20 As you can probably tell, I consider use of the symbol A t and the name “energy-time uncertainty 
relation” a little misleading. As defined here, At is in no sense an uncertainty; rather it is a time interval —in 
more precise quantum-mechanical terms, it is the amount of time that must pass before we can distinguish 
^(.r, At) from its progenitor ^(.r, 0). This time interval is sometimes called “the measurement time” and is 
sometimes labelled by the particular observable being measured, as A Iq. 

27 The absolute value bais in the denominator of (I l.l 16) are there just to ensure that At > 0, as it 
must for this definition to make sense. 


526 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 





product of the uncertainty in the energy, A E, and the uncertainty in the observable we’re 
measuring, A Q. We’ll then introduce into this relation the rate of change of ( Q ) and 
thereby transform it into Eq. (11.115). 28 

According to the Generalized Uncertainty Principle (11.55) the uncertainty product 
A E A Q is bounded from below as follows: 


A£AQ>||(i[W,<3]) 


(11.117) 


The commutator [7-f, Q ] is related to the rate of change of ( Q ) by the general evolution 
equation (11.90), /.<?., 


(i[H,Q]) = hf t (Q '). 

If we replace the commutator in (11.117) by (11.118), we wind up with 


AEAQ > \ 
z 



(11.118) 


(11.119) 


We’re almost there. Dividing both sides of (11.119) by the rate of change of ( Q) 

gives 


A E 


A Q > h 


( 11 . 120 ) 


According to the definition of the change time At , this is just the energy-time inequality, 


AE At > § 
~ 2 


energy-time inequality 


( 11 . 121 ) 


An Application: Natural Widths and Lifetimes of Atoms 

When an atom initially in an excited stationary bound state decays, it emits a photon 
whose energy, according to conservation of energy, should equal the difference between 
the energies of the initial and final states of the atom. Spectroscopists, who measure the 
energy of the emitted photons from decay of an ensemble of atoms, can deduce a great 
deal about the properties of the atom. 

But high-precision spectroscopic measurements reveal that not all photons emitted 
from an ensemble (all members of which are in the same quantum state) have the same 
energy, even if all correspond to decay to the same final state. (Usually, the final state is 
the ground state.) Instead, the frequencies of individual emitted photons fluctuate around 
the expected value, T//i times the difference between the initial- and finabstate energies. 
From this observation, physicists conclude that associated with the energy of an excited 
stationary state of an atom is a width AE. 


28 The derivation draws on one in Quantum Mechanics by A. Messiah (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 
1965), p. 319-320. See also pp. I52ff in Quantum Physics by R. G. Winter (New York: Wadsworth, 1979). 


Sec. 11.8 The Strangest "Uncertainty Relation” of Them All 527 




On the face of it, this conclusion seems nonsensical, for haven’t we said innumer¬ 
able times that the energy of a stationary state is shaip? Yes. we have. 29 But we’re no 
longer discussing “a stationary state” in the abstract; we’re measuring the energy of a 
stationary state in the laboratory. And the precision of such a measurement is limited by 
the energy-time inequality. 

In this case, the observable we’re measuring is the energy of the n th excited state, 
E n . 30 So At is the time interval that must elapse before we can ascertain that a transition 
from this state to the ground state has occurred. Atomic physicists call this interval the 
natural lifetime of the state and often denote it by r„. With this convention, we write 
the energy-time inequality as 

(A E) n r n > (11.122) 

where (AE) U is the width of the n th stationary state. (An atom in the ground state 
cannot decay to any other state, so the width of the ground state of an atom is zero.) 

One can calculate the natural lifetime r„ by measuring the intensity of the beam of 
emitted photons as a function of distance along this beam. 31 Typically, the lifetimes of 
excited states of atoms range from 10 -7 sec to 10 -9 sec—not very long on a macroscopic 
scale, but not zero either. Consider, for example, the natural lifetimes in Table 11.5 of 
the first five excited states of the hydrogen atom. 

Question 11-24 

Calculate the natural widths of each of the excited states of the hydrogen atom whose 

lifetimes are shown in Table 11.5. Compare your answers to the energies of these stationary 

states, which are given (in eV) by E = -13.6n 2 , where n= 1 labels the ground state. 

Not all excited states are so short-lived. Most atoms have a few special stationary 
states called metastable states whose lifetimes are typically around 10“ 3 sec. (Metasta¬ 
bility of states, where it occurs, arises for reasons other than the energy-time inequality.) 
In Table 11.6 are shown lifetimes of several excited states of several atoms; the point of 
this table is to suggest the range of lifetimes one finds in nature. 

Question 11-25 

Comment on the truth or falsity of this statement: 

“Quantum mechanics lets you violate the law of conservation of energy if you do so quickly 

enough.” 

29 I did qualify this blanket statement in § 7.7 by alluding to the interaction of systems with the vacuum 
electromagnetic field, which interactions eventually induce a decay from any excited stationary state to the 
ground state. This qualification points out why stationary states as rigorously defined in quantum mechanics 
do not actually exist in nature. But this fact rarely influences experiments, for the time required for the vacuum 
field to induce decay is long compared to the duration of most measurements. In this section we are concerned 
with a quite different phenomenon: limitations imposed by nature on the precision of measurement of the 
energy oFa stationary state. 

30 Except for the hydrogen atom (in a simple approximation that neglects certain weak interactions), 
more than one quantum number is required to uniquely label an energy level. So in an actual application to 
an actual atom, n here must be replaced by several quantum numbers, however many are needed to uniquely 
identify a level. Such quibbles are irrelevant, however, to our immediate concerns. 

31 For details of such an experiment, see § 9.7 of Modern Atomic Physics: Quantum Theory and Its 
Applications by B. Cagnac and J. C. Pebay-Peyroula (New York: Wiley, 1975). 

528 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



TABLE 11.5 NATURAL 
LIFETIMES OF THE 
FIRST FIVE EXCITED 
STATES OF THE 
HYDROGEN ATOM." 


/I 

t„ (10 8 sec) 

2 

0.21 

3 

1.02 

4 

3.35 

5 

8.8 

6 

19.6 


"Mean lifetimes for 
principal quantum 
number n. 


TABLE 11.6 LIFETIMES OF SOME 
(NON-METASTABLE) EXCITED STATES 
OF SOME ATOMS. 


Atom 

State 6 

Energy 

[eV] 

Lifetime 

[ns]" 

He 

3p( 3 P°) c 

23.01 

94.7 


3pCP°) 

23.09 

1.724 


4s ( 3 S) 

23.59 

64.0 

Li 

2 p( 2 P°) 

1.85 

27.3 


3p( 2 P°) 

3.83 

200.0 


4p( 2 P°) 

4.52 

450.0 

F 

3s CP) 

12.72 

7.0 


3s ( 2 P) 

r.o 

3.5 

Cl 

4s ( 2 P) 

9.23 

1.0 

Ga 

5p( 2 P°) 

4.106 

50.0 

Cs 

6p( 2 P°) 

.432 

31.0 

Hg 

6p( 3 P°) 

4.887 

118.0 


7p( 3 P°) 

8.829 

170.0 


" 1 ns = 1 x 10 9 sec. 
b For details of state labels, see Volume II. 
c Post-superscript indicates parity. 

Source: [Data from Table 7.4 of Reference Data for 
Atoms, Molecules, and Ions, A. A. Radzig and 
B. M. Smirnov (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985).] 


The implications of the energy-time inequality may be unsettling. Must we abandon 
stationary states, with their convenient wave functions and sharp energies? Certainly 
not. We can continue to probe the mysteries of quantum systems using these states as 

Sec. 11.8 The Strangest "Uncertainty Relation" of Them All 529 







theoretical constructs, knowing that we are working within the model of the microscopic 
universe that is defined by quantum mechanics. But this inequality does mean that when 
we seek to measure a property of such a state in the laboratory, we must accept the 
limitations imposed by nature, which prohibits us from pinning down the properties of 
these systems as precisely as we might like. 32 


*11.9 FINAL THOUGHTS: CONSERVATION “LAWS,” DOGMA, 

AND THE FALL OF PARITY 

Throughout this chapter, we have dignified a number of results by the name “laws.” To 
so describe a mathematical relationship or a physical principle is to make it sound like 
absolute truth. But, of course, all such “laws” are no more than expressions of how 
natural scientists (at the moment) understand the workings of the part of the physical 
universe they study. Some laws, such as Einstein’s statement that the speed of light is 
independent of the motion of the observer, still hold; others, such as Newton’s “Laws of 
Motion” have required considerable modification. 33 

Sometimes the elevation of a physical result into a physical law comes about 
because of non-scientific factors, such as human nature and aesthetics. Which brings us 
to conservation of parity. What is important about this physical law is that it is not true. 
What is interesting about it is how its falsity was discovered. As Emilio Segre remarks 
in his popularization From X-Rays to Quarks (San Francisco: Freeman, 1980): 

The violation of parity conservation is perhaps the greatest theoretical discovery of 
the postwar era. It has extinguished a prejudice that had been transformed into a 
principle on the basis of insufficient tests. 

Parity Reviewed 

In Chap. 9 we proved that the bound-state Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of a single particle 
in one dimension with a symmetric potential are eigenfunctions of the parity operator ft. 
This discovery achieved its most elegant statement in this chapter, where we showed that 
the commutativity of a symmetric Hamiltonian and ft was responsible for the existence 
of such simultaneous eigenfunctions and for the conservation of parity as expressed by 
Eq. (11.91), d(II) fdt = 0. From this equation it follows that a state that initially 
has definite parity has the same parity at all subsequent times. Of course, if H is not 
symmetric, then [H,ft] ^ 0 and Eq. (11.91) does not hold for all states. 

But if the potential is symmetric, then a bound stationary state wave function 
„(£,£) is transformed under inversion (a: —» —x) into either itself or minus itself; 
consequently the probability density |#„(a;, t) | 2 is unchanged by inversion, and we cannot 
tell by any measurement that inversion has taken place. A colorful, metaphoric way to 
describe this fact is to say “the state is (experimentally) indistinguishable from its mirror 
image.” This, in a nutshell, is the meaning of parity invariance. 

32 For more on uncertainty relations in general and on the energy-time inequality in particular, see the 
articles in The Uncertainty Principle and the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics , edited by W. C. Price and 
S. S. Chissick (New York: Wiley, 1977). I particularly recommend the article by J. Rayski and J. M. Rayski, 
which begins on p. 13. 

33 See How the Laws of Physics Lie by N. Cartwright (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). 


530 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



This description translates with but slight modification to systems with one or more 
particles in three dimensions—systems such as atoms, molecules, or elementary particles. 
In three dimensions, the parity operator transforms r into — r, and parity invariance is 
colloquially referred to as “reflection symmetry.” The situation in three dimensions is, 
in some respects, unlike the one-dimensional case. For example, the bound Hamiltonian 
eigenfunctions of a three-dimensional system whose Hamiltonian commutes with ft do 
not necessarily have definite parity. But commutativity of if and ft does guarantee the 
existence of simultaneous eigenstates, i.e., stationary states with definite parity. 

If the system contains more than one particle, then reactions among the particles 
are possible; the particles can, for example, collide or break apart, forming new particles. 
According to the “law” of conservation of parity, the parity of a state of the system is 
unchanged by such a physical process. 34 

One can measure the intrinsic parity of various subatomic particles by studying 
reactions among them, but the deduction of the parities of such a particle hinges on the 
equality of the parities of the state before and after the reaction. That is, parity must be 
conserved. But is it? 

Sometimes a Great Notion 

From the 1930’s until 1956, physicists assumed that the answer was yes. In 1924 Laporte 
discovered evidence of the parity of states of atoms in his studies of atomic transitions, 
and soon thereafter the theoretician Eugene Wigner showed parity conservation in such 
transitions to follow via quite beautiful symmetry arguments (rather like those of § 9.4). 
What then happened is revealing that physicists are, after all, only human. As Segre 
puts it: 

Whenever a regularity is valid in many cases, there is a tendency to generalize it to 

other untested circumstances and perhaps even to make it into a “principle.” ... Such 

occurred with the principle of conservation of parity. 

Then, in 1956, while trying to explain the decay of a particular subatomic particle, 
the Chinese physicists Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang reviewed the hard evidence 
for conservation of parity and pointed out that no such evidence existed to substantiate the 
belief that parity is conserved in all interactions. Lee and Yang discovered that only for 
the hadronic and electromagnetic interactions had parity conservation been demonstrated 
in the laboratory , 35 Subsequent experiments by Chien Shiung Wu and others showed 
that, sure enough, parity conservation had somehow left the rarefied realm of scientific 

3 i Discussing parity conservation in reactions is complicated by the multi-particle nature of the system; 
at least two particles must, obviously, be present. The state of such a system must be described by a multi- 
particle state function, a beast we won’t meet until Volume II. Suffice it to say that parity is a multiplicative 
property, e.g., that the parity of a state of two particles is equal to the product of the intrinsic parity of the first 
particle, the parity of the second particle, and the parity of their relative motion. For an accessible introduction 
to these matters, sec Chap. 9 of Subatomic Physics by H. Fraucnfelder and E. M. Henley (Englewood Cliffs, 
N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1974), which also includes detailed discussions of the experimental determination of the 
intrinsic parities of particles. 

35 All interactions in nature fall into four categories: the nuclear (also called “strong” or “hadronic") 
interaction, which holds the nucleus together; the electromagnetic interaction, which dominates in atoms, 
molecules, and solids; the weak interaction, which controls some non-electromagnetic decay reactions; and 
our friend, gravity. For a fine introduction to such matters, see The Forces of Nature , 2nd ed. by Paul Davies 
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986.) 


Sec. 11.9 Final Thoughts: Conservation ‘‘Laws," Dogma, and the Fall of Parity 531 



fact and entered the dubious domain of dogma: systems in which the weak interaction 
plays a role are not invariant under inversion. The parity of states of such a system is 
not conserved. 

Aside: The Puzzle At Hand. Lee and Yang were trying to explain a mystery 
known as “the 6 —r puzzle.” (Only physicists would come up with such a name for 
a mystery.) Briefly, the problem was this: A particular subatomic particle (called a 
K-meson, or kaon) was observed to decay into two different states, one a state of 
even parity, the other of odd parity. (These were called the “6 decay mode” and the 
“t decay mode,” respectively. Hence the name.) The state of the kaon before decay 
had definite parity, so it appeared that unless two different particles were involved 
(a hypothesis refuted by other experiments), a parity-changing reaction could occur. 

The existance of such a reaction violated the tenet of conservation of parity. 36 

I bring up this historical sidelight hoping it will help you keep the “laws” of 
quantum physics in perspective. There are no true laws in physical theory; there are 
only the fruits of man’s efforts to understand the workings of nature. The results of 
those efforts are accomplishment enough. 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 

“How in the hell 

do we hunt that kind of country?” 
asked Fric. 

“Slowly,” said Ratnose, 

“and on foot.” 

— from Blood Sport: 

A Journey up the Hassayampa 
by Robert Jones 


Exercises 

11.1 A Little More about the Parity Operator 

Prove that 

[n,p] + =o, (li.i.i) 

where [Q, H] + is the anticommutator of Q and R, defined as 

[Q,R] + =QR + RQ. 

11.2 Operators and Measurement 

[a] Calculate the commutator of the position operator and the Hamiltonian for a particle in 
an infinite square well. 

[bj In a simultaneous measurement of energy and position for such a particle, is it possible 
to determine both observables to infinite precision? Is it possible to determine one or the 
other to infinite precision?^ only one, whic!Tbne? Explain each of your answers. 


36 This is a greatly simplified sketch of the drama and controversy involved in overthrowing the con¬ 
servation of parity. I strongly recommend that you seek out the wonderful, vivid account of this adventure, 
written largely by the participants, in Adventures in Experimental Physics: 7 volume (Princeton, N. J.: World 
Science Education, 1973). Another valuable account is C. N. Yang, Elementary Particles (Princeton, N. J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1962). 


532 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



11.3 Measurement 

A particle of mass m is in a constant force field of magnitude -g, where g is a positive 

constant. 

[a] Do the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian of this system have definite parity? Prove 
your answer. 

[b] Evaluate the commutator of H and p for this system. 

[c] Does a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions of H and p exist? Why or why not? 

[d] Consider a simultaneous measurement of the energy and linear momentum of such a 
particle. Let A E and A p denote the uncertianties for these observables. Evaluate a 
lower bound on the product of these uncertianties. 

[e] Suppose that in the energy measurement in [d] we discover that the particular state of 
our ensemble is stationary. Will a (simultaneous) measurement of the linear momentum 


show that in this state the momentum is sharp (/>., that A p = 0)? Explain your answer 
carefully and fully. 

11.4^ Some Statements to Critique 

^ Consider each of the following statements. If the statement is correct, say so and go on to 
the next one. If, however, the statement is in any way incorrect, write a brief, concise, 


clear explanation of what is wrong with it. Moreover, if you decide that a statement is 


wrong, give a specific example to support your judgment. 


[a] The wave function of a system is always an eigenfunction of the system Hamiltonian. 

[b] If two Hermitian operators Q and R commute, then every eigenfunction of Q is neces¬ 
sarily an eigenfunction of R. 


[c] An operator that is equal to its own adjoint is necessarily Hermitian. 

[d] If two operators Q and R do not commute, then the product of the uncertainties A Q and 
A R is necessarily positive— i.e., A Q A R > 0. 


11.5 More Little Bitty Questions about Operators 

[a] Let H denote the Hamiltonian of a one-dimensional simple harmonic oscillator (SHO) 
of mass m and natural frequency u/ 0 . Evaluate the commutator of H of this system and 
the momentum operator. 

[b] Is the observable p a constant of the motion of the microscopic simple harmonic oscillator? 
Why or why not? 

[c] Could there exist stationary states of the SHO in which the momentum is sharp? Provide 
a thorough justification of your answer. 

[d] Derive an expression for the rate of change of (p) for an arbitrary state of the SHO. 
What is the rate of change of (p) for a stationary state of the SHO? Is the momentum 
of the simple harmonic oscillator a conserved quantity? Why or why not? 

[e] Suppose [H,p] ± 0. Does it necessarily follow that AE Ap > 0 for all states of a 
conservative system? Why or why not? 

[f] Consider a system with a constant potential energy, V(x) = Vo. What is [?Y,p] for 
such a system? Is it possible (in principle) to measure the energy and momentum of such 
a system to infinite precision? Briefly explain your answer. 


11.6 Conserved Observables 

[a] There are two distinct circumstances in which the expectation value of an observable 
can be independent of time, one involving a property of the state, the other involving a 
property of the system. Discuss these two circumstances. 

[b] Which of the properties mentioned in [a] must be" fulfilled iftheobservableTis conserved? 

[c] Suppose the condition in [b] is satisfied. What can we then conclude about the observable 
for the special case that the system is in a stationary state? Justify your answer. 

[d] Consider an observable Q such that 


[W,Q] =ci. 


( 11 . 6 . 1 ) 


Exercises and Problems 533 



Suppose the system is initially in an eigenstate of Q corresponding to the eigenvalue q. 
Derive an expression for ( Q) (£). 


Problems 

11.1 A Little Commutator Conundrum 

Suppose operators A and B each commute with a third operator, C. 

[a] Do A and B necessarily commute— i.e., is [A, B] necessarily zero? 

[b] Could A and B commute? If so, under what circumstances? If not, why not? 

[c] Suppose C = [A, B ]. Prove that 

p,/(B)] = [A,B]4/(B) (11.1.1) 


[d] Use Eq. (11.1.1) to evaluate [p, <?(£)] • 

11.2 More Classical Physics Regained! 

In § 11.7 we derived the equation for the rate of change of the expectation value of an arbitrary 
operator and showed how these equations for x and p reduce to their classical counterparts in 
the classical limit (Ehrenfest’s Theorem). Here we shall explore a few ramifications of this 
theorem. 

[a] Consider two Hermitian operators, Q and R, that may depend explicitly on the time. 
Show that 

J t m = (§ a) + (q§) + S<«[*.*]*> + 5<*[*"*)>• 

[b] Use this result and the appropriate commutator from Table 11.3 to evaluate the rate of 
change of the mean kinetic energy: d (T) /dt , where T is the kinetic energy operator. 
Discuss the relationship of your result to the classical work-energy theorem , 


jT =-v ■ &V(r,t). 


[classical physics] 


( 11 . 2 . 2 ) 


[c] Derive an expression for d {px) /dt. Now, consider this quantity for a stationary state. 
Show that for this case 



[for a stationary state] 


(11.2.3) 


This result is called the Virial Theorem. 

[d] Use the Correspondence Principle to evaluate this result in the classical limit, translating 
it into an expression in terms of classical functions of time and obtaining 

T — -x~V{x) [in the classical limit] (1 1.2.4 a) 

2 dx 

Derive from this equation the more familiar form 


T = —\xF classical Virial Theorem (1 \ .2Ah) 

11.3 Measurements on a Free Particle 

A free particle in one dimension is initially in a state represented by the wave function 

*(x,0 )=(jj=Y e i ‘»*e-' ,2 ' 2/2 , (11.3.1) 


534 Chap. 11 Operators in Quantum Mechanics II 



where ft and ko are constants. 

[a] Is the linear momentum of the particle sharp at t = 0? If not, evaluate its uncertainty. 

[b] Do you think that (re) and/or (p) for this state depend on time? Why or why not? 

[c] Evaluate (x) (0) and (p) (0) for this state. 

[d] Now evaluate the rate of change of the expectation values (re) ( t ) and ( p) (t) using the 
general evolution equation (11.88). Was your answer to [b] correct? 

[e] In Chaps. 4 and 6 we studied extensively the behavior of a wave packet such as 
Eq. (11.3.1). Let At be the time required for the center of the packet to move a distance 
Ax, i.e., 


[f] 



d{x) 


dt 


(11.3.2) 


Is this a reasonable definition of the “measurement time” for this system? Discuss its 
relation to the “change time” defined in § 11.8. 

Evaluate AE and At for the state in Eq. 11.3.1. and show that the uncertainty product 
is 


AE At = ^ 
2 


1/2 


1 + 




(11.3.3) 


Show that this product satisfies the energy-time inequality. 

11.4 A Problem with Correspondence 

Consider a macroscopic particle—say a ball of mass m = 10 gm—that undergoes simple 

harmonic motion with a natural frequency of 2 cycles/sec. 

[a] Suppose the particle is in its ground state. Evaluate the uncertainty in its position and 
momentum. Do your results satisfy the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle? 

[b] Suppose now that we set the particle into motion, giving it an initial amplitude of 10 -3 m. 
Calculate its energy. What is the order of magnitude of the quantum number appropriate 
to a stationary state of this energy? Explain why this system does not manifest quantum 
behavior. 


11.5 Another Slant on Uncertainty 

Consider a particle of mass m in the ground state of a simple harmonic oscillator potential. 

[a] Write down the wave function for this state. In the tables of Chap. 9, look up the 
expectation values and uncertainties of position and momentum for this state. 

[b] Determine the momentum-space wave function for this state and deduce from it an 
expression for the probability that in a measurement of the momentum you would obtain 
a value between p and p + dp. 

[c] Evaluate the uncertainty product for position and momentum. Why is this state called 
“the minimum uncertainty wave packet”? 

11.6 Constants of the Motion and Certainty 

Prove that the uncertainty AQ in a constant of the motion Q is independent of time, i.e., that 
^ A Q(t) = 0 for any state ty. (11.6.1) 


11.7 Evolution of Eigenstates 

Suppose that a single particle in one dimension is initially (i.e., at t = 0) in an eigenstate of 

an observable Q that is a constant of the motion. 

[a] Prove that the system remains in that eigenstate as the state evolves. 

[b] Explore what happens as the state evolves if the observable Q is not a constant of the 
motion. At the least, prove that even though the initial state is an eigenstate of Q, the 
state at t > 0 is not necessarily an eigenstate of this observable. (You can, if you are 
clever, prove that it cannot be an eigenstate of Q.) 


Exercises and Problems 535 



CHAPTER 12 

Eigenfunction Expansions 

How to Solve Any Problem in 
Quantum Mechanics 


12.1 The Fundamental Problem of Quantum Physics 

12.2 The Generalized Born Interpretation 

12.3 All That Heaven Allows: Possible Outcomes of Measurement 

* 12.4 The Many Uses of Eigenfunction Expansions: Two Examples 

* 12.5 Coping with the Continuum 

12.6 The Artful Dodge: Solving the TDSE the Easy Way 

* 12.7 The Amazing Expanding Square Well (An Example) 

* 12.8 Momentum Redux: The Case of the Continuum Continued 

12.9 Final Thoughts: Constants of the Motion Reconsidered 



The thing that most exasperates you 
is to find yourself at the mercy of 
the fortuitous, the aleatory, the random, 
in things and in human actions — 
carelessness, approximation, imprecision, 
whether your own or others. 

—If on a Winter’s Night a Traveller 
by Italo Calvino 


We are almost through. We need only tie up a few loose ends to complete the first leg 
of our journey through quantum physics. In particular, we must remove two apparent 
limitations to quantum mechanics, limitations on our ability to access knowledge about 
observables and to solve the TDSE. In the process, we’ll gain further physical insight 
into the advanced mathematical tools of Chaps. 10 and 11. Then, in Chap. 13, we’ll 
confront a major mystery. 

The first limitation is that we don’t know how to extract from a state function the 
full measure of allowed information about any observable except position. Second, we 
don’t know a practical way to calculate the wave function at t > 0 from its initial form, 
unless the state is stationary. 

The apparent exalted status of position is illusory, a side-effect of our decision 
to represent quantum states by functions of position variables (and time). According to 
Postulate II, these functions are to be understood as position probability amplitudes ; this 
is the Born inteipretation (Chap. 3). If we know only about such functions, we’re in good 
shape if asked to predict the results of a position measurement , but not if faced with a 
measurement of any other observable. Knowing the wave function at t, we can calculate 
the position probability density—from which we can, in turn, calculate the probability 
of detecting the particle in an infinitesimal volume element about a point in space. From 
this density we can also calculate statistical quantities relating to position: its mean value 
and uncertainty. 

But if we want to predict the results of a measurement at t of, say, the energy , we 
are in trouble. To be sure, we can evaluate from the wave function at t the statistical 
quantities ( E ) ( t ) and A E(t )—with no small amount of work—but we don’t know how 
to predict the probabilities of obtaining various values of energy in the measurement. Not 
yet, anyway. In this sense, quantum theory seems incomplete. 

Happily, we can easily remedy this defect. In § 12.2 we’ll learn how to calculate 
probabilities for an arbitrary observable, reasoning from the expansion of the wave func¬ 
tion in a complete set of eigenfunctions of the operator that represents the observable. 
Viewed in this light, the eigenfunction expansions of Chaps. 10 and 11 stand revealed as 
tools for “translating” the information buried in the wave function into the “languages” 
of observables other than position. 

The second deficiency in our quantum theory derives from our emphasis on sta¬ 
tionary states. In Part III, for example, we learned several deft mathematical gambits for 
solving the timedndependentSchrddinger equationiov the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions 
of various (conservative) systems. These functions appear as the space-dependent factors 
in the wave function of any state that is stationary. But, as I have noted repeatedly, sta¬ 
tionary states are special, uncommon in nature. Most quantum states are non-stationary. 
To solve for the wave function of such a state at t > 0, we must solve the tim e-dependent 
Schrodinger equation, no easy task. 


537 



Happily, the machinery of Chaps. 10 and 11 has, almost as a by-product, afforded 
us a crafty way to bypass this sinister partial differential equation: a surprisingly simple 
way to solve the TDSE without actually solving the TDSE. We’ll discuss and illustrate 
this method in § 12.6 and will explore some of its consequences in §12.7-12.9. 

You may be relieved to learn that we won’t need to introduce any new theoretical 
constructs in this chapter. We can remedy both deficiencies mentioned above by com¬ 
bining the mathematical devices of Chaps. 10 and 11 with concepts and methods from 
previous chapters. 

A final note. Because this is (almost) the last chapter, I have (none too surrepti¬ 
tiously) folded into it a review of most of the high points of this volume. So among the 
discussions and examples of this chapter, 1 you’ll renew the acquaintance of many old 
friends. I hope the review aspect of this chapter will help prepare you to start Volume II, 
where we’ll plunge vertiginously into new and strange territory. 


12.1 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

To elaborate a bit on the problems we’ll tackle in this chapter, I want to consider briefly 
a question of knowledge. Every field of physics has an archetypal problem. In classical 
mechanics, for example, it is to calculate the trajectories of the particles comprising 
a system, knowing their initial positions and momenta and the forces acting on them. 
From these trajectories we can calculate any desired property of the system to any desired 
precision. 

In quantum mechanics, the nature of the archetypal problem is influenced by the 
limitations nature imposes on the questions we can ask and by the peculiar language in 
which we answer. Our ultimate objective is qualitative and quantitative understanding 
of observed microscopic phenomena and their time development. But in pursuit of this 
grail we are allowed only a special kind of description of these phenomena, for we can 
access only probabilistic information about a quantum system. 

Figure 12.1 A schematic representation 
of the quintessential conundrum of quantum 
physics: to predict the results of an 
ensemble measurement of an observable 
at measurement time t knowing the 
Hamiltonian of the system and the wave 
function that represents the initial state. 

The fundamental problem of quantum mechanics is illustrated schematically in 
Fig. 12.1. We are given the Hamiltonian H of a system, which operator includes a 
potential energy derived from the forces acting on and within the system, and the wave 
function that represents the initial state of the system, at t = 0. At some time t > 0, 
a measurement of an observable Q is performed on an ensemble of systems in the state 
that evolved from the initial condition . The problem is: What happens? That is, what 
are the possible outcomes of this measurement? 

1 Students often complain, with some justification, that textbook authors work only easy examples, 
leaving all the hard stuff for the homework problems. This chapter is, in part, a review, and we have sufficient 
machinery and sophistication to deal with examples that are more complicated than we have hitherto faced. 
YouTl find a few here, beginning in § 12.4. 



538 


Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



3=isss-S'--':: 

„* - -r ns'srrjr^s^’^ 

measurement time (see Fig. \i.n- 

quantities from (12.2) 


( Q )(t ) = (*(t)|Q|*W) 

AQ(t) = v^TWWl 5 - 


(12.3) 


AW) = VV* _ __ p fand the 

nf A9 Unless Q = x, or Q ~~ & * 

But how t:: & p— —* wuhout ,he proper 

system is m an enW » an d deter . 

f0rm 0My “"special case W ’*(*.0) is an eigenfunction 

Scfissss^-TST 

® l *’ t) f fc(X) f e , Ue energy are equal to 1 if the energy 

The P — ; -—s’f :: s £3 

as basses :~ 7these quan,ities 

^ in t P t e even\n f ttespecial case of a stationary *£| SK example, 

.he probabilities *- The probabilities of obtaining various 

re 

p( X ) = \m*)\ 2 • lpos ; ,ionl - m6 . 

f 1 E = -So - 2^° [energy!- 

= 1 0 otherwise \ 

^ , . „ li in a measurement ot 

. sav the probability of getting +1 >" a I 

But how would we ca cu • we r to such questions— 

2 Ud a creek without a paddle. 

S.c,,l TbeFundamenlalProbiemo, Quantum Physics 



of quantum theory."t'heBorn^nterpretatlon.* 6 mUS ' 8 ° baCk '° ° ne ° f ,he bu,warks 

12.2 THE GENERALIZED BORN INTERPRETATION 


On fire that glows with heat intense 
We turn the host of common sense 
And out it goes at a small expense! 

—lolanthe 

by Gilbert & Sullivan 

Let’s defer for the moment the problem of solving the TDSP „„h 
know the wave function for a state at time tsn„r • , DSE . and su PP ose that we 
In this section, we’ll find out how to extract from ih'" 8 / partlcle . In one d 'mension. 
accessible information about a measurement at t nf H fu . nc,lon the ful1 P ano P'y of 
simplicity, suppose that the spectrum of O fthV l ?" “ *1'™* observable Q- For 

and non-degenerate. We’ll label the eigenvalues 18e ,? Va UeS of ,ts 0 P erator Q) is discrete 
9l . , w " , :„ bC elgenvalues Wlth a " index n in ascending order as 

suppose the state at this time is wm'JS ofo"'*^ s P ectra in § 12.5.) Finally, 

Easy Calculation of the Mean 

le, ’ S . c ° nsider ,be average of the results 
* W [t) ' La,cu iatmg this quantity directly from & l a 


«?>(<)=/ ^(x,t)Q^( x ,t)dx 

J — DO 


(12.7) 

might involve considerable complicated a |oeh™ oc » . 

exercises, and problems. Indeed inct i,- 8 , S WC Ve See " in ear,ier examples, 

a mess, for, by hypothesis the wave funer” 8 ^ ^ ° f ^ ° n could be 

can write % * X " and the cor ™pond,ng coefficient by c„(f), we 


(M) 2^Cn{t)xn{x). [expansion observable: Q]. (12 8) 

The projection of 9 on which carries the time dependence, is 3 

c n(t) = (Xn I ®(f)> = j ^ X*n(z)9(x, t) dx. (|2 9) 

introducing a sliglif modiflca don famdia^ brackelTOUto^f'bLn- 8 '* C h Valualed is crilical - s ° ' an. 
brocke, by t. Of course, this function also depends * , 'S v rLlis n ,"\' hC S ' a ' e funC ' ion * « 

.be conventtons of Dirac brake, notation. „ is »r job^Zember S they Ve^hcre" 315 '" 5 " ““ ia 

540 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



In general, there is one such projection for each eigenvalue , although in particular cases 
one or more projections may be zero. Such an expansion is possible for any x,t ), 
because Q is Hermitian, so the set of its eigenfunctions is complete. Let’s see how this 
strategem simplifies the evaluation of ( Q) (t). 

To evaluate the expectation value we require the expansion (12.8) of \P(rc, t) and 
that of its complex conjugate, 4 


**(».<) = £<■(*)*:;<(*)• (12.10) 

n' 


Substituting these expansions into Eq. (12.7) (and grouping terms suggestively), we 
obtain 


(Q) {t)= f [ ^2 c* n , (t)xl> (®)| \Q ^2 c » (OXn (^) 

7—oo L J 


dx. 


( 12 . 11 ) 


The operator Q in the second set of square brackets slides through the coefficient in 
each term in the sum over n and acts on its eigenfunctions Xn to give q n Xn • So (12.11) 
becomes 


(Q) (*) = I [X^'WXn'fa)] dx 

*' -oc n' n 

= '52'52c*n'(t)Cn(t)q n (Xn’ \ Xn)- 


(12.12a) 

(12.12ft) 


In writing Eq. (12.12ft) I lapsed back into Dirac notation in the hopes that doing 
so would clue you in to our next maneuver. Since Q is Hermitian, its eigenfunctions are 
orthonormal, i.e.. 


/ i \ r- f 0 n! ^ n 

(Xn‘ Xn) = K'.n = ( , , . (12.13) 

( I n = n 

We can use this Kroneker delta to eliminate one of the sums in Eq. (12.12ft), e.g ., by 
reducing the sum over n' to only one term, n' = n. The expectation value then assumes 
the simple form 



(Q) W = £<(<)<:„(%> = £ |c„(t)| 2 9„ 

1/ 

n n 


Notice that the remaining summation in this expression must include all eigenvalues of 
Q. Of course, terms for which the projections c„(t) = 0 need not explicitly be included, 
but whether or not any of these projections are zero depends on the state in question [see 
Eq. (12.9)]. In general, you must not leave any eigenvalues out of this sum. 

Equation (12.14) is our alternate method for computing the expectation value. 
Rather than insert the wave function into the definition (12.7), then act on it with Q 
and integrate_over re, we first determine^the projections on the eigenfunctions of the 
observable, then simply evaluate the sum in (12.14). Although this method may require 


4 Can you figure out why in this equation I used n! as the summation index? There is method in my 
madness: Soon we’re going to substitute this expansion and Eq. (12.8) into (12.7). Were we to sum over n in 
both summations, we would have the devil of a time keeping the two summations distinct. Moral: Always use 
different dummy summation indices when combining several sums in a single expression. 


Sec. 12.2 The Generalized Born Interpretation 541 




evaluating several integrals [the expansion coefficients (12.9)], it is in many cases still 
easier to implement than the definition (12.7). 

Question 12-1 

Suppose ^(x,t) is an eigenfunction of Q. Use Eqs. (12.9) and (12.14) to evaluate (Q) in 
this case. 


Example 12.1. The Average Energy of a Non-Stationary State 

In Example 11.4 we investigated a non-stationary state of the simple harmonic oscillator 
represented by the wave function [c./., Eq. (11.64)] 

tf(x,t) = -)= [Mx)e~ iElt/h +7Mx)e- iE2t/fi ] . (12.15) 

v50 L 

At one point in this example, we needed the expectation value of the energy, and I claimed 
that this quantity is 

(E) = hu o = 2.48/iwo. 02.16) 


Let’s see if I was right. 

Conveniently, the wave function (12.15) is already written as an expansion in eigen¬ 
functions {^„(x), n — 0,1,2,... } of H. So we need not compute the projections c„(£) 
as such. 5 Comparing (12.15) with the general form (12.8), we find 


c ' {t) = 7B e 


1 —iE\t/h 


c 2 (<) = — 7=e 


_ -iE 2 t/h 

x/50 

Cn (t) = 0 n = 0 and n > 2 


(12.17) 


To calculate the mean value of E, we need only insert these projections in the general 
result Eq. (12.14), which for Q = E takes on the following form: 6 


oc OO 

(B) (() = Y, Cn (f)Cn (t)E„ = l C » Ml 2 Bn 

ii =0 n=0 


(12.18) 


Squaring the moduli of the non-zero coefficients in (12.17) and inserting the result into this 
equation, we obtain 



/cn 1 3, 495, 62 , , 101Q . 

<£> = 50 2 fiWo + 50 2 ,iWo = 25' iU ’ 0 ’ (12 ' l9) 

in agreement with (12.16). Notice that the mean value does not depend on time. Although 
the projections in (12.17) do depend on time, this dependence vanishes because it is restricted 
to complex exponential factors e~ lEnt ^ h , which disappear when multiplied by their complex 
conjugates as prescribed by Eq. (12.18). Notice also how easy this calculation was compared i 
to direct substitution of ^(x,Q into the integral form of (E). 


throughout this chapter, you need to keep careful track of the “expansion observable.” In this example 
we chose Q^Titrfor the observable we’re interested in is the energyrPlI rely on you to remember that c,T(t) 
here is a coefficient in an expansion in energy eigenfunctions, not, as earlier in this section, in eigenfunctions 
of an arbitrary observable. 

g Do not use this expression unless the spectrum of the Hamiltonian of the system is solely discrete. It 
does not apply, for example, to a finite potential, such as the Morse potential (Chap. 9) or the finite square 
well (Chap. 8). The energy spectra of these systems are a mixture of discrete and continuous portions, and 
methods to be introduced in § 12.4 arc required. 


542 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



We could also use the expansion of ^ in eigenfunctions of Q to evaluate the 
expectation value of an operator function /(<§). But first let’s explore further the ex¬ 
pression (12.14) for (Q), which is a mathematical clue to the physical significance of 
the projections c n (t). 


, / The Born Interpretation of the State Projections 

y 

I want to recall an argument we made in Chap. 3 concerning the expectation value of 
position, 7 



\^(x,t)\ 2 xdx. 


( 12 . 20 ) 


Our understanding of (x) as the average of results obtained in a position measure¬ 
ment follows from the Born interpretation of ^(x,t) as a position probability amplitude. 
According to Postulate II, P(x y t) = t)\ 2 is the probability that in an ensemble 

measurement at time t the particle will be detected in the infinitesimal volume element 
dx at x. Thus |^(x, t)\ 2 serves as the “weighting factor” for the value x in Eq. (12.20) 
for the mean value. This quantity is calculated as an integral rather than a discrete sum 
because the allowed values of this particular observable encompass the continuum from 
—oo to Too. 

Now compare Eq. (12.20) for (x) to Eq. (12.14) for ( Q >. In the latter, the squared 
modulus |c„| 2 of each projection c n serves as a weighting factor for the value q„ of the 
observable Q. That is, the structure of Eq. (12.14) is 



average 

value 


E 


possible 

results 


/ value of 
V observable 


probability of \ 
getting that value J J 


( 12 . 21 ) 


This form suggests that we interpret |c n (£)| 2 as a probability for obtaining the value 
q n in a measurement of Q at time t. In terms of the ensemble on which the measurement 
is performed, |c fl (£)| 2 is the fraction of members that exhibit the value q n [provided the 
wave function is nomialized such that |c„(f)| 2 = 1, as in Eq. (12.33) below]. This 
is the Generalized Born Interpretation. 8 

To summarize this interpretation, we write Eq. (12.14) as 

(Q)(t) = Y^P(ln.t)q„, (12.22) 

II 



7 A word of advice: Before proceeding further, go back and re-read § 3.4 and 3.6. Doing so will make 
the analogy I am about to wheel in more striking. 

8 Bom introduced this interpretation in the second of two papers he published in 1926 [Z.fiir Phys., 
38, 803]. In the first of these papers [Goett. Nadir., p. 14], Bom introduced the idea of interpreting quantum- 
mechanical quahtities as pfobabilities. (Interestingly, this suggestion—the key to the entire interpretative^ 
structure of quantum physics—appeared only in a footnote Born added to the paper after it had been set in 
type, a “note added in proof.”) Both papers dealt with electron scattering, but Bom’s innovation was in no 
way limited to such processes. Deftly summarizing the structure of the new theory. Bom writes: “The motion 
of particles follows probability laws but the probability itself propagates according to the law of causality.” If 
you are curious about how Bom came up with his idea, have a look at Chap. 12 of A. Pais’ remarkable book 
on “matter and forces in the physical world,” Inward Bound (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986). 


Sec. 12.2 The Generalized Born Interpretation 543 



where 

/ 


probability that in a measurement of 
P(q n > 0 = l c « {t)\ 2 = Q at time t a member of the ensem¬ 
ble will exhibit the value q n 


12.23) 




Example 12.2. Probabilities for Energy Measurement on a Non-Stationary State 

Let’s return briefly to the non-stationary state (12.15) of the simple harmonic oscillator 
and use the Generalized Born Interpretation to predict the outcome of a measurement of 
energy. According to Eq. (12.17), only two values will be obtained: E\ = 3huj 0 /2 and 
E 2 = bftu>o/2. So no members will exhibit, say, the ground-state energy E = hu)o/2\ nor 
will any exhibit an energy intermediate between the two observed values, such as 2/kt/o. 
(There is a more profound reason why such an energy isn’t seen, as we’ll discover in the 
next section.) The probabilities that a member of the ensemble will actually exhibit one of 
these two energies are 


P(£,) = |c,(t)| 2 = = 0.02 (12.24) 

ol) 

_ 4Q 

P{Et) = |c 2 (t)| 2 = = 0.98. (12.25) 

So we predict that 2% of the member systems will exhibit the lower of the two energies, 
3fiu;o/2, and that the other 98% will exhibit the higher, 5hwo/2. As expected, these results 
don’t depend on when we perform the measurement, and the sum of the probabilities (12.24) 
and (12.25) is 1. 


Simple Calculation of Complicated Expectation Values 


Let’s now generalize to functions of Q our new method for calculating expectation values 
from the projections of the state function. Consider, for example, ( Q 2 ), which we need 
to calculate the uncertainty A Q [see Eq. (12.3)], 


/ oo 

-00 


ty*(x,t)Q 2 '$(x, t)dx. 


(12.26) 


Now watch carefully. Insertion of the expansions (12.8) and (12.10) into (12.26) leads 
to an equation just like (12.11)—except, of course, that in place of Q in (12.11) we have 
Q 2 . The operator Q acting twice on x» yields g 2 , instead of q n as in Eq. (12.12a). In 
short order, we obtain the following result: 


{Q 2 ) W = H CnWCn(<)«?, = 53 l C " Wl 2 «n 
n n 

Question 12-2 

Fill in the missing steps in the derivation of (12.27). 


(12.27) 


Example 12.3. The Energy Uncertainty of a Non-Stationary State 

To really appreciate how useful (12.27) is you should reflect on the awkward algebraic 
difficulties that would arise were we to calculate the uncertainty of a non-stationary state 
using the integral form for (Q 2 ). In contrast, watch how easy Eq. (12.27) makes this chore. 

544 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 





In Example 12.2 we calculated { E) for the non-stationary state (12.15) from the 
projections of this wave function on the eigenfunctions of fi. These projections also appear 
in the expression for (£ 2 ). 


{E*)(t) = Y J \c,M 2 El ( 12 . 28 ) 

n=0 


Using Eqs. (12.17), we can calculate this expectation value by trivial arithmetic, obtaining 




1234 

200 


o = 6.17 /l 2 Wq, 


(12.29) 


which agrees with Eq. (11.69 b). This result, together with (12.19), leads us immediately to 
the uncertainty A E = 0.14 ftuo, in accord with Eq. (11.70). 


Question 12-3 

Further generalize the derivations of this section to show that 




(12.30) 


Discuss how you would evaluate this mean value from the coefficients of the power series 
expansion of the function f(q) [see Eq. (10.12) and surrounding discussion]. 


/ 


Evidently, the mathematical technique of eigenfunction expansion can render cal¬ 
culations such as evaluating uncertainties comparatively easy. One wonders what other 
problems this technique might help us subdue. For example, might it assist in solving the 
time-dependent Schrodinger equation? No textbook author would ask such a question 
unless the answer is yes, as you’ll see in § 12.5. 


/ 


The Languages of Quantum Mechanics 


The central result of this section is the Generalized Born Interpretation (12.23). Although 
we have thus far applied this interpretation only to the energy, it can be used to extract 
from a state function probabilistic information about any observable. In Chap. 4, for 
example, we used a similar technique to extract momentum information via the Fourier 
Transform of a wave function (§ 4.7; see especially Table 4.2); we’ll take another look at 
momentum in § 12.4. Underlying the Generalized Born Interpretation is the mathematical 
technique of eigenfunction expansion. 

This technique provides a variety of ways to look at a state. When we consider 
the particular representation of a state afforded by the wave function we are 

“viewing the state through position glasses.” That is, this function is the most convenient 
representation of the state for study of position. 

But the wave function is not particularly convenient if we are interested in another 
observable—sa y, energy. By expanding the w ave function in the com plete set of ei gen- 
functions of the operator that represents that observable—the eigenfunctions of 7 i —we 
develop a representation of the state that lets us view it “through energy glasses.” The col¬ 
lection of all projections of on the energy eigenfunctions is an alternate representation 
of this state. This representation consists of the numbers 

{c„(£) = (V’n | ^W)j all }• energy representation (12.31) 


Sec. 12.2 The Generalized Born Interpretation 545 



I 


This set may be infinite in number and may be complex. The energy representation 
contains no more or less information than does the position representation, the wave 
function t). But, as the examples of this section attest, the energy representation is 
as convenient for the study of energy as t) is for the study of position. 

I have spoken of “viewing a state through various glasses.” If you don’t like this 
optical metaphor, you might prefer to think of an eigenfunction expansion as a device 
for translating physical infonnation concerning the state from its expression in $( x y t ), 
in the “language of position,” to its expression in (12.31), in the language of energy. 
Thus, the expression for ( E) we used in the examples of this section is the translation 

(E)(t)= V(z,t)HV(x,t)dx <—> (£)(t) = £|c„(t)| 2 £„. (12.32) 


Using the power and flexibility of eigenfunction expansion, we can translate all 
of the fundamental equations of quantum physics into the language of any observable 
(see Fig. 12.2). Here, for example, is the translation of the normalization requirement 
| ty) = 1 from the language of position into that of energy: 


£ 


\I/*(:e, t)^(x t t) dx = 1 


£ |c„(t)| 2 = I- (12.33) 




Figure 12.2 Several representations of a 
quantum state To translate the wave 
function into the desired representation, 
we merely expand it in the complete set 
of eigenfunctions of the operator that 
represents the observable of interest; the 
resulting projections are an alternate, often 
more convenient, representation of the state. 


Question 12-4 

Write down the translation of the normalization requirement into the language of an arbitrary 
observable Q with a discrete spectrum. How could you use this form to normalize an initial 
wave function that was written as a linear combination of eigenfunctions of Q1 


12.3 ALL THAT HEAVEN ALLOWS: POSSIBLE OUTCOMES 
OF MEASUREMENT 


Surely our profession, Mr. Mac, 

would be a drab and sordid one 

if we did not sometimes 

set the scene so as to glorify our result. 

... the quick inference, the subtle trap, 
■the-clever. forecasLof coming events, 
the triumphant vindication of bold theories 
—are these not the pride and 
the justification of our life’s work? 

—Sherlock Holmes, 
in The Valley of Fear 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 


546 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



In the previous section we considered an energy measurement on a simple harmonic 
oscillator in the non-stationary state (12.15). In discussing the possible outcomes of this 
measurement (Example 12.2), I remarked in passing that no values other than E\ = 
3/iu>o/2 and E 2 = bhuo/2 would be seen; no other eigenvalues (£?„ for n 7 ^ 1, 2), nor 
any energies not equal to an eigenvalue. The probabilities (12.24) and (12.25) support this 
remark: the sum of P{Ei) = 0.02 and P(E 2 ) = 0.98 is 1.0, so E\ and E 2 exhaust the 
possibilities inherent in this state function. This crucial feature of this state is mirrored in 
its wave function, which is revealed in (12.15) as a superposition of the first and second 
excited states only. 

We can generalize these findings about the possible outcomes of measurement to 
an energy measurement on an arbitrary state of an arbitrary quantum system. Assuming, 
for simplicity, that the (energy) spectrum of the system is discrete, the expansion of the 
wave function of the state in eigenfunctions {^(e)} looks like 


’S'(M) = ^2c n (t)i/f n (x). 


n = l 


(12.34) 


The interpretation of the projections c„(£) as energy probability amplitudes admits the 
possibility that a system could exhibit any of the eigenvalues E n . The probability 
for obtaining the n th eigenvalue, P{E n ) = |c„(f)| 2 , is non-zero only if the projection 
c„(f) = (tpn I happens to be non-zero for the state But no other energies are 
possible; the list of eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian, {E u , all n} exhausts the possibilities 
in any state function 

This seems a radical conclusion, and you may be wondering, nervously, “How can 
I be sure all possibilities are included in (12.34)?” Let’s add the probabilities for each 
of the eigenvalues and see if the result is equal to 1. If this sum is less than 1, then a 
member might exhibit an energy other than one of the eigenvalues of H. But if the sum 
is equal to one, then each member will exhibit one of the eigenvalues. (If it is greater 
than one, we’ve made a mistake.) 

The sum of the probabilities of obtaining one of the eigenvalues of ii is 


^P(£„) = ^|c„(t)| 2 . 

»=1 n =1 


(12.35a) 


Do you recognize this sum? 


* * * Pause while reader ponders * * * 


Sure; it is the normalization integral | \£) expressed in the language of energy 
[c.f, (12.33)]. And for any state \P, the normalization integral is unity, so 

— 00 - 

Y,P(E„) = 1. 02.356) 

« = 1 

Consequently, in an energy measurement of a microscopic system (whose Hamiltonian 
has a discrete spectrum), each member exhibits either E\ or E 2 or E% or any other 
eigenvalue E„. But no other value. This phenomenon is, of course, energy quantization. 


Sec. 12.3 All That Heaven Allows: Possible Outcomes of Measurement 547 



Example 12.4. Energy Quantization in the Laboratory 

Quantization of energy was stunningly demonstrated in famous energy-loss experiments 
conducted by James Franck and Gustav Hertz in 1914. Today, energy-loss experiments play 
an important role in the study of electron scattering from atoms and molecules. The goal 
of a modem energy-loss experiment is usually to determine accurate cross sections —the 
probabilities that an incident electron will scatter in various directions, with (or without) an 
attendant loss of energy. (Recall § 8.3.) 

Were the (bound-state) energies of the target not quantized, a projectile with incident 
kinetic energy T could lose any amount of energy from 0 to T, and the observed energy-loss 
spectrum—the energies of the scattered electrons, as measured by the detector—would be 
smooth, revealing this continuum. Instead, it shows spikes (see Fig. 12.3a). 

We now know the reason. No matter what the state of a target particle is prior to the 
collision, an incident electron can induce transitions only between the stationary states of the 
target, for the only energies available to the target are the eigenvalues of its Hamiltonian. 
That is, the state of the target before and after the collision must either be a stationary 
state or a superposition of stationary states; neither possibility admits energies other than 
the Hamiltonian eigenvalues. 

Consider, for example, a gas of molecules that are initially in their ground vibrational 
state (n = 0 in the simple harmonic oscillator model). An electron incident on such a gas 
can lose energy only in discrete multiples of h times the fundamental vibrational frequency 
of the molecule. (Of course, the simple harmonic oscillator model is only an approximation, 
and observed energy-loss spectra reveal deviations from the equal spacing predicted by this 
model. The point, however, is not the size of the spacings but the fact that they are 
invariably seen.) This behavior is illustrated by the energy-loss spectrum for e-Fa scattering 
in Fig. 12.3.° In this experiment, a beam of nearly mono-energetic electrons is fired out of 
an electron gun at an incident kinetic energy of 1.6 eV. This electron beam crosses a beam 
of F 2 molecules, and the resulting scattered electrons are picked up by a detector that is 
capable of measuring energy within an experimental uncertainty of about 0.03 eV. 

The energy-loss spectrum in Fig. 12.3a shows the intensity of detected electrons that 
have lost less than 0.8 eV. At each energy loss, the intensity is proportional to the fraction 
of electrons in the incident beam that lost that amount of energy, i.e., to the quantum- 
mechanical probability of an incident electron losing that amount. This spectrum consists 
of regularly-spaced peaks separated by about O.lleV. (We note from Table 9.1 that for 
this molecule, Hujq = 0.1136eV.) The large peak at zero energy loss corresponds to elastic 
scattering, but each of the other peaks corresponds to excitation of F 2 molecules from 
the ground vibrational state (n = 0) to excited vibrational levels with n = 1,2,...,7. 
(Excitations to states with n> 7 are so unlikely that they aren’t seen in this experiment.) 

The levels involved in these excitations are superimposed on the potential energy 
curve for F 2 in Fig. 12.3b [compare to Fig. 9.13, the potential energy curve for H 2 ]. You 
can see that the potential well of the ground electronic state deviates somewhat from the 
purely parabolic shape of a true SHO potential. These deviations are responsible for the 
barely perceptible differences in the spacings between adjacent peaks in the spectrum. 10 

This argument, that the normalization requirement proves that only eigenvalues of 
the Hamiltonian can be obtained in a measurement of energy, generalizes easily to an 

°Y. Fujita, S. Yagi, S. S. Kano, H. Takuma, T. Ajiro, T. Takayanagi, K. Wakiya, and H. Suzuki, Phys. 
Rev. A., 34, 1568 (1986). 

10 Thc width of each spike in the spectrum is due primarily to the finite “energy resolutions” of the 
detector and of the source. That is, an experimentalist can determine the energy only to within the experi¬ 
mental uncertainty of these devices. (This uncertainty is much larger than the natural linewidth, the quantum- 
mechanical uncertainty imposed by nature.) This imprecision manifests itself as a width in the measured 
spectrum. 


548 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



Intensity (arb. units) 




R (A) 
(b)- 


Figure 12.3 (a) An energy-loss spccirum 
for e-F 2 collisions showing excitation of 
bound vibrational states from the ground 
state, n = 0. The incident energy is 1.6 eV 
and the detector is placed at an angle of 
30° with respect to the axis defined by the 
incident electron beam. [From Y. Fujita, 

S. Yagi, S. S. Kano, H. Takuma, T. Ajiro, 

T. Takayanagi, K. Wakiya, and H. Suzuki, 
Phys. Rev. A., 34, 1568 (1986); used with 
permission], (b) Potential energy curves 
for the ground state of F^ and for two 
excited states. In each case, the potential 
determined in a theoretical study (in 
which the TISE for the molecule was 
solved numerically) is represented by 
solid curves, and the potential deduced 
from experimental data is shown as a 
dashed curve. [From D. C. Cartwright and 
P. J. Hay, J. Chem. Phys., 70, 3191 (1979); 
used with-permissionr]— 


arbitrary observable. We can expand \I/( x , t) in the complete set of eigenfunctions of any 
Hermitian operator, a la Eq. (12.7). No matter what the observable, the normalization 
condition translates into a mathematical statement that the sum of the probabilities for 
all the eigenvalues is unity. Hence no other possibilities are allowed: 


Sec. 12.3 All That Heaven Allows: Possible Outcomes of Measurement 549 







Rule 

The only possible outcomes of measurement of an observable on any quantum state are the 
eigenvalues of the operator that represents the observable. 


Aside: Thinking about the Continuum. In thinking about this rule, it is very 
important to remind yourself that these eigenvalues need not he discrete. I picked 
energy quantization of the SHO to illustrate this rule in a dramatic context that would 
lead us back to ideas we encountered early in this book. But the spectra of eigenvalues 
of most operators consists of discrete and continuous parts; any value in the continuum 
of such an operator is allowed. But no value is allowed from the range encompassing 
the discrete part except one of the eigenvalues. We’ll discuss continuous and mixed 
spectra further in the next section. 


The Pause That Refreshes 

Stop and think for a moment about how utterly remarkable this rule is. It is a pinnacle 
of our exploration of the microworld, the point at which all the basic ideas we discussed 
in Chap. 2—uncertainty, duality and quantization—have emerged naturally and without 
additional hocus pocus from the postulates of quantum mechanics. Our study of the 
(admittedly abstract) machinery of quantum mechanics has thus led us to a deep, profound 
understanding of the most remarkable phenomena in the microverse, phenomena that 
mark striking departures in that world from classical behavior. Such insight is no mean 
accomplishment, and you should give yourself a little time to savor it. Then read on. 


12.4 THE MANY USES OF EIGENFUNCTION EXPANSIONS: 

TWO EXAMPLES 

To see how to use the Generalized Bom Interpretation and the technique of eigenfunction 
expansion, let’s work a couple of examples. The first is a more realistic (and intricate) 
version of the examples in § 12.3. The second turns this interpretation on its head to show 
how we can deduce information about an unknown state function from data obtained in 
an experiment. 

Example 12.5. A Non-Stationary State of an Organic Molecule 

In the problems at the end of Chap. 7, we learned that even the simplest (non-trivial) quantum 
system—a single particle in a one-dimensional infinite square well—finds application in the 
study of nuclei, atoms, and molecules. For example, in Pblm. 7.5 we used such a well to 
model the hexatriene molecule, a complicated organic molecule that can be approximated 
by an infinite square well of length L = 7.3 A. 

Suppose that from the set-up of our experiment, we deduce that the initial state of 
—the electron can be represented by the wave function (with #-= 0 at the left wall) 

/•? n 

tf(x,0) = Jj^x{x-L). (12.36) 

In the laboratory, an ensemble measurement of the energy of the particle is performed at 
t = 0. What does the experimentalist find? 


550 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 





Question 12-5 

Verify that this state function is normalized. [You will find it easier to choose the left 
wall at x = 0—see Eq. (12.42) below.] 

The first thing to notice about this state is that it is not stationary. ( Why not?) So the 
energy of the electron is not sharp (A E > 0), and various members of the ensemble could 
exhibit one or another of the eigenvalues [Eq. (7.56)] 


E n — 71 


7 r 2 h 2 
2 mi 2 


»= 1 , 2 ,... 


(12.37) 


Quantization is at hand. Without even analyzing the state, we proclaim that no energies 
other than the discrete values (12.37) will be seen in the measurement . 

Since the state is non-stationary, the mean of the observed values is not equal to any 
of the eigenvalues (12.37) (except by remarkable accident). We can, of course, calculate 
(E) (0) from the wave function (12.36), viz., 11 


(E) (0) = (*(0) | H | *(0)> 


^(x, 0) T ty(x } 0) dx 


o 


2m 


§/ *t*- L >5ih x ~ l ) 


dx 


30 
m L b 

30h 2 

mL 5 


x(x - L) dx 


-x 3 

L 1 

- -Lx 2 

L 

3 

o 2 

0 


So the average of the results of the energy measurement will be 


<■><•>-i£• 


(12.38a) 

(12.38ft) 

(12.38c) 

(12.38 d) 
(12.38c) 

(12.39) 


Using L = 7.3 x 10“ 10 m, the mass m c = 9.1095 x 10~ 31 kg of the electron, and Planck’s 
constant h = 1.0546 x 10~ 34 J-sec, we calculate the value (E) (0) = 1.1455 x 10 _19 J = 
0.7150 eV. [Note that 1J = 6.2415 x 10 18 eV (see Appendix D).] 

Fine. But suppose we want the probabilities of obtaining one or another of the eigen¬ 
values (12.37)? According to the Generalized Born Interpretation (12.23), these probabilities 
are the squared moduli of the projections of '3 >(.t, 0) on the eigenfunctions of the energy 
operator, H —which brings us back to the eigenfunction expansion 


^(x,0) = y>,W,,(s). 


(12.40) 


n=i 

We need to evaluate the energy probability amplitudes 

rL 


c n (0) ■ = (Vft . | <ft(0)) - a - / i j } * t (x)^(x r 0 ) .dx^ -(12.41) 

Jo 


“Notice that in (12.38ft) I integrate from 0 to L, not from —L/2 to L/2. Earlier in this book I argued 
that when dealing with a symmetric potential we should put the origin of coordinates at the midpoint of the 
potential. But for this state, the presence of the factors x and x — L in ^(a;, 0) argue for the unusual choice of 
x = 0 for the left wall. In Question 7.7, you converted the eigenfunctions (7.55) to such a coordinate system, 
finding the functions in Eq. (12.42) below. (Didn’t you?) 


Sec. 12.4 The Many Uses of Eigenfunction Expansions: Two Examples 551 



With x = 0 at the left wall of the potential, the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions are [see 
Question 7.7] 


+n(x) = Sill (»*£) 71=1,2,.... 


So the 7 i th projection of the wave function (12.36) is 


/) 

/ 

/ 


/ 



)dx 


n even 
n odd 


(12.42) 

(12.43a) 

(12.43/7) 

(12.43c) 


Aside: Filling in the Gaps. “Whoa there!” I hear you cry. “About those 
steps between (12.43a) and (12.43/?) ...” Well, okay. This integral is rather 
more complicated than ones we’ve done so far, so here’s a quick sketch of its 
evaluation. The first thing to do is to get rid of the unsightly factors of 7 r and 
L parading through the integrand; we accomplish this by changing the variable 
of integration from x iou = mrx/L. This transforms the integral in (12.34a), 
which I’ll call 


/„ = J sin x { x ~ L) dx , 


into 


/„ = 


V7l7r) 


I rm* 

/ “ 

Jo 


( u — 7i 7r) sin u du 


= {-) 

\nn / 


u 2 sin u du - nn 


run 

I us'mu 

Jo 


(12.44) 

(12.45a) 
du. (12.45 b) 


(Don’t overlook the dependence of the upper limit of integration on 7 i.) Stalking 
these integrals in various tables, I found 


f 

Jo 


u 2 sin udu = (—l)" +1 (7i 2 7T 2 — 2) — 2 = 


7 i even 


7 i 2 7 r 2 — 4 n odd 


(12.46a) 


usinudu = ( — 1) ,,+I 7i7r = 


-7i7T 7i even 
7i7T n odd 


(12.46/?) 


Substituting these expressions into (12.45/?), I came up with (12.43/?). 


So the energy probability amplitudes (12.43c) are 


c„(0) = 


0 

1 8n/15 

7l 3 7T 3 


7i even 
7i odd 


(12.47) 


For this state, only energies that correspond to odd quantum numbers n have non-zero 
probabilities. So none of the systems in the ensemble will exhibit the energies E 2 , E 4 , Eg, 
.... Furthermore, the probability of obtaining E n (for n odd, of course) is proportional to 
7 i -6 and so drops off very rapidly: e.g., 


P(£?i) = |ci | 2 = 0.9986 
P(E 3 ) = M 2 = 0.0014 


(12.48) 


552 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



So most members will exhibit the ground-state energy E\ = 0.7057 eV, which is why the 
mean value, (E) = 0.7150eV, is so close to this energy. But the mean isn’t equal to E\, 
because a few members exhibit the energy of the second excited state, E 3 = 6.3509 eV. 

As a consistency check, let’s calculate the mean energy (12.39) from the probability 
amplitudes, viz.. 


(E)(0) = Y, M0)|*E, 

11 = 1 
(ll odd) 


1 /8v/l5\ 2 2 

2—* n 6 l 7T 3 ) n 2 mL 2 

n=i \ / 

(?i odd) 


(1 2.49a) 


(12.49*) 


Referring to a table of infinite series, we find the series in (12.49 /j), 12 

V'' 1 _ i , 1 1 _ 7T* 

^ n* ~ + 3* + 5 1 + = 96‘ 


(12.50) 


»=i 
n odd 


Hence the ensemble average of the energy at t = 0 is 

/p\ , Q \ _ ( 8\/l5V ir 2 h 2 7T 4 
{E){0) -{—) 2mL^ 96 


5 h 2 
mL 2 ' 


(12.51) 


in happy agreement with (12.39). 13 
Question 12-6 

Use the energy probability amplitudes (12.47) to evaluate the energy uncertainty for 
the state represented by (12.36). 


The above example was the first in which we had to explicitly evaluate the pro¬ 
jections of a state function on the eigenfunctions of the observable being measured. 
Previously, the projections were handed us on a silver platter, the wave function being 
already expressed as the appropriate linear combination [c./., Eq. (12.15)]. As well you 
might imagine, nature is rarely so kind; algebraic contortions like those of this example 
are typically required to determine the amplitudes. 

Actually, such problems are usually done backwards. The most common situation 
in the laboratory is the following: we have in hand the results of one or more ensemble 
measurements and need to deduce the state function. Let’s see how to do this for a 
imple case. 

Example 12.6. Deducing the State Function from Measurement Results 

Consider the following challenge: You are trying to determine the form of the wave function 
that represents the state of an ensemble of CO molecules. In an energy measurement at t = 0, 
70% of the members exhibit E = 0.4035 eV, while 30% exhibit the value E = 0.1345 eV. 
From this information, what can you deduce about the wave function? 


12 My favorite such compendium is Table of Integrals ami Other Mathematical Data, 4th ed. by 
H. B. Dwight (New York: Macmillan, 1961), where you’ll find this series as Eq. (48.14). 

u This example may seem a poor argument for using eigenfunction expansion techniques for evaluating 
expectation values. To be sure, in this case one could argue, especially if one is unfamiliar with series 
expansions such as (12.50), that evaluating the integral (12.38) is the easier approach. Perhaps. (I, however, 
loath evaluating integrals and will do almost anything to avoid them.) If you still think the integral approach 
might be easier, try evaluating the uncertainty AB(0) using the integral form of (# 2 ) (0). 


Sec. 12.4 The Many Uses of Eigenfunction Expansions: Two Examples 553 



Since we have in hand data about energy, we ought to work in the language of this 
observable— i.e., in the energy representation of Eq. (12.31). Let’s model the CO molecules 
by a simple harmonic oscillator. 11 We know the Hamilto nian eige nfunctions (Table 9.6) 
and the molecular data which we need to determine (3 = y/mojo/h. 

Using hvo = 0.2690eV for CO (see Table 9.1) in the general form of an energy 
eigenvalue, E n = (n + ^)huto, we deduce that the observed energies are, in fact, E 0 
and Ei. Therefore the initial wave function is a linear combination of the ground- and 
first-excited state eigenfunctions only, 

ty(x t 0) = Co(O)V'oOe) + ci(0)i/>i(®). (12.52) 


We can determine the initial coefficients c 0 and c\ in this expansion from the energy 
data, since the measured probabilities are just the squares of these coefficients: 

P(Eo) = k„| 2 = 0.30 
P(E\) = |ci| 2 = 0.70. 


Comes now the tricky part. It is incorrect to conclude from this data, as many do, that 
co = v/O0 = 0.5477 and c\ = \/0.70 = 0.8367. Think for a moment; can you figure out 
why this conclusion is not warranted? 

The answer is that the projections c n are not necessarily real numbers', they could be, 
but we would be wrong to deduce from the given data that they are. From the measured 
energy probabilities we can deduce only the magnitude of these projections, i.e.. 


Equations (12.53) 


M o)l = 


Mo)| = 



(12.54) 


This means that we do not fully know the coefficients in the wave function (12.40). In 
particular, we don’t have enough information to determine the phase of either projection. 
To introduce the phase. I’ll write each of these complex numbers in a form containing two 
as-yet-unknown phase constants which I’ll denote by <5o and 6i: 

c o (0) = |co(0)| e i6 ° (12.55a) 

d(0) = |ci(0)|e i61 . (12.556) 


Using (12.54) we write the initial wave function (12.52) as 15 


14 The SHO is a good approximation for low-lying vibrational states of this molecule. In Chap. 9 
we learned that deep within the potential well of a molecule [see Figs. 9.13 and 9.14] the function V(R) is 
accurately approximated by the simple harmonic oscillator potential defined with respect to the equilibrium 
intemuclear separation R e , i.e., 

V(R) « ^mwl{R-R e ) 2 . 

From the energy data we deduce that in the state in this example, only low-lying vibrational levels are involved. 
Were this not true, were there a significant probability of obtaining a high-lying energy, we might need more 
arcane models, such as the Morse potential. 

15 Aclually, only the relative phase of the constituents of 4 >(.t, 0) is known. Like any other wave 
function, this one is indeterminate to within a global phase factor [recall § 3.5], which I’ll call 6 g i 0 i>. That is, 
we can write (12.56) as 


^(.r, 0) = 



554 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



(12.56) 


0 ) 



e i6 °iJJo(x) + 





[Note carefully that Eq. (12.56) represents the state of the ensemble of systems before an 
energy measurement has been performed. Said measurement changes that state (and hence 
the wave function) in a way we’ll discuss in Chap. 13.] In § 12.5, we’ll learn how to 
calculate from this initial function the form of the wave function for any t > 0. 


Question 12-7 

Try to guess the state function for t > 0 that evolves from the initial state represented by 
(12.56). You can probably do this without actually knowing why you are doing what you’re 
doing. 



Question 12-8 

Evaluate the average value of and the uncertainty in the energy from the state function 
(12.56). Repeat the evaluation, working directly with the energy probability amplitudes. In 
either case, do the phase factors appear in your final result? Can you ascribe any physical 
significance to these factors? 


Additional experiments, in which another observable is measured, are required 
to determine more about this wave function. We’ll consider multiple measurements in 
Chap. 13. 


*12.5 COPING WITH THE CONTINUUM 

According to the Generalized Born Interpretation, the projection of a state function on 
an eigenfunction of a Hermitian operator is the probability amplitude for obtaining the 
corresponding eigenvalue in a measurement of the observable represented by that oper¬ 
ator. 16 We can apply this interpretation to continuous as well as to discrete spectra, 
provided we take account of the peculiar nature of the continuum. 

Recall that some operators, such as n, define purely discrete spectra ; others, such 
as x, define purely continuous spectra ; and still others, such as ii for a (sufficiently 
deep) finite potential well, define mixed spectra , which consist of discrete and continuous 
eigenvalues. An example of the latter is the symmetric finite square well. Such a well of 
width L = la 0 , and depth Vq = 497t 2 /8 [the parameters of Example 8.8] supports four 
bound stationary states (see Table 8.7), i.e., four of the eigenvalues of its Hamiltonian 
are discrete. The rest, the eigenvalues for E > Vo, comprise the continuum, as suggested 
by Fig. 12.4. 

Into the Continuum 

To adapt the Born Interpretation to continuous eigenvalues we have only to take into 
account the fact that they are continuous. For contrast, consider first an observable 

where (he relative phase constant 6 r( .| is just the difference between <5i and 6o in Eq. (12.56). The global 
phase factor vjtnishes in the calculation of any measurable quantity and so is irrelevant to the physics of the 
state represented by this function. 

1G Be sure you understand all the jargon in, and the meaning of, this intentionally lingo-laden restatement. 
The words arc important. Incidentally, in Chaps. 10 and 11,1 introduced some of the material in this section 
(without justification) in footnotes. You need not have read those footnotes to understand this section, but if 
you skipped them, you probably ought to go back and read them after studying it. 


Sec. 12.5 Coping with the Continuum 555 



£, e 2 e 3 


1 1 
. 1 . 

1 

1 

1. 

1 

1 

1 . 

V 0 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 



<___;i_,- > 

- 1 T 

Discrete part The continuum 


Figure 12.4 The energy spectrum of a finite square well. The energies for the well that 
we analyzed in Example 8.8 are shown as the discrete part of the spectrum. The rest is 
the continuum. 


whose spectrum is purely discrete. To evaluate, say, the expectation value of such an 
observable, we sum [Eq. (12.14)], 

(Q) (t) = ^ |c„(£)| 2 </„, [purely discrete spectrum] (12.57) 

» 

being careful to remember that the sum over n must include all discrete eigenvalues of 
Q. Now, what if the spectrum is purely continuous ? 

Sure. We integrate : 

(Q) (£) = / P(q,t)qdq. [purely continuous spectrum] (12.58) 

all </ 

The integral includes all (continuous) eigenvalues of Q. This generalization comes, 1 
hope, as no suiprise; it is precisely the method we’ve been using to evaluate (x) (t) from 
tf(M) [see Eq. (12.20)]. 

But there is more to the Born Interpretation for continuous eigenvalues than re¬ 
placing a sum by an integral. We must also reconsider the meaning of the probability 
amplitude in an eigenfunction expansion. The quantity |c„(£)| 2 in Eq. (12.57), which 
applies only to a discrete spectrum, is a probability , the probability of obtaining q n in 
a measurement of Q at t. But the quantity P{q,t) in (12.58) is a probability density 1 
for the observable Q, just as P{x,t) = |^(.t,£)| 2 in (x) ( t ) is a probability density for \ 
position. 

To write down this interpretation explicitly, we need the projections of a state 
function vp on the eigenfunctions of Q , which we’ll now take to be an operator with 
a purely continuous spectrum. By analogy with the discrete case [Eq. (12.8); see also 
Table 12.1], I’ll denote these projections by c(q ) t) and write the eigenfunction expansion 
as 

'&(x,t) = / c(q, t)X(i{x) dq. [expansion observable: Q ] (12.59) 

all q 

The projection c(q ) t) is 

c{q,t) = (x,, | ^(£)) = f x* q (x)^{x y t)dx t (12.60) 

J — oc 

as in the discrete case [see Eq. (12.9)]. 


556 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



TABLE 12.1 SUMMARY OF FUNDAMENTAL QM EQUATIONS 
FOR DISCRETE AND CONTINUOUS OBSERVABLES. 



Discrete 

Continuous 

eigenvalue equation 

projection of ^ 

probability 

mean value (f(Q))(t) 

Q\ ii = QnXn 

C»(t) = (Xn\m) 

MO I 2 

£„ MOIVfa.) 

QXq = QXq 

cM = (Xq\m) 
\c(q,t)\ 2 dq 
f\c(q,t)\ 2 mdq 


Question 12-9 

Substitule Eq. (12.59) into (12.60) and thereby verify that the two are consistent. Use the 
fact that eigenfunctions corresponding to continuous eigenvalues satisfy the normalization 
condition 



X*,'( x )Xq(x)dx = 6(q -q) 


Dirac Delta function 
normalization 


(12.61) 


where 6(q' - q ) is the Dirac Delta function. 


Now, c{q,t) in (12.59) is a probability amplitude for Q , but since the eigenvalues 
of this operator are continuous, the corresponding probability is \c(q } t)\ 2 dq (c/., § 3.3 
and 3.5). That is. 


probability that in a measurement of Q at 
P(q> t) dq — | c(q, t) | 2 dq = time t a member of the ensemble will exhibit 

a value between q and q-\- dq 


(12.62) 


That is what we mean when we say |c(< 7 , t) | 2 is a probability density. 


Aside: Concerning the Position Operator. It may not be obvious how to apply 
the expansion (12.59) to our most familiar operator, x. The arguments in this section 
suggest that, for each value so of position, the value of the wave function \D(a;o,/) 
should be the projection of the state function on an eigenfunction of the Hermitian 
operator x. But is it? In § 10.5, I noted that the eigenfunctions of x are the Dirac 
Delta functions [see Eq. (10.67/;)], i.e.. 


x6(x - x 0 ) = x 0 6(x - xo). (12.63a) 

If we use these eigenfunctions for 1° Eq. (12.60), we get for the projections 

c(xo,t)= f 6(x-xo)V(x,t)dx. (12.63/;) 


The effect of the Dirac Delta function in the integral on the right-hand side of this 
equation-is to seleet-from the continuum-of-possible-positions the value re =~xor 
which gives for the position probability amplitude 

c{x 0 ,t) = (12.63c) 

The corresponding probability density is, therefore, 

P{x 0} t) = |c(a;o, t)\ 2 = ^(rco,/)! 2 . (12.63 d) 


Sec. 12.5 Coping with the Continuum 557 





Equations (12.63) reveal the Born Interpretation of Chap. 3 (for position) to be a 
special case of the Generalized Born Interpretation. 


Momentum Reconsidered 


One of the most important observables with a purely continuous spectrum is the linear 
momentum. The eigenvalue equation for the momentum operator p, 


PXp = PX,» 


(12.64) 


defines only continuous eigenvalues, the spectrum — oo < p < oo. Its eigenfunctions 
[normalized according to Eq. (12.61)] are 


X,>{x) = 



(12.65) 


Let’s see what happens when we expand an arbitrary wave function in the complete set 
of eigenfunctions (12.65). 

This expansion, according to (12.59), is an integral over p: 

y(x,t) = J c(p,t)Xi,(x)dp= -jL=J e i '“ / ' , c(p,<)dp. (12.66) 


Note well that in (12.66) we integrate with respect to the eigenvalue p, not with respect 
to x. That is how the eigenfunction expansion (12.59) works. 

Equation (12.60) prescribes how to calculate the projection c(p,i) of $ on the 
eigenfunction Xp : 

C(p,t) = (x„ | »(*)} = r *;(*)#(*. «)<&• (12.67) 

J-OO 


(Here is where we integrate with respect to x.) Using the explicit form of the eigen¬ 
function, this projection becomes suggestively familiar: 

c(p, t) = -2= r *(as, t) dx. (12.68) 

v 27r Ti J —oc 

Equations (12.66) and (12.68) look suspiciously like the Fourier transform relations 
we used in Chap. 4 to go between the position and momentum representations of a state 
function for a free particle. Compare, for example, Eq. (12.66) to Eq. (4.77a) 

*(*, t) = - 1 L= r $(p) e~ iEtlh dp. (12.69) 

v 27 rh J-oc 

The momentum probability amplitude for a free particle is therefore related to the mo¬ 
mentum wave function $(p) of Chap. 4 by 17 

c(p, £) = (x P | = $(p) e~ lEl ! Ti . [for a free particle] (12.70a) 

The momentum wave function itself-is just the momentum amplitude at /; — 0, /. g tf — 


$(p) = c(p,0). 


(12.70/;) 


17 We’ll explore further the time-dependence of c(p,t) in § 12.8. And in § 12.9 we’ll discover that the 
simple, exponential time dependence in (I2.70n) is not a general result; it applies only to systems for which 
p is a constant of the motion. One such system, as we learned in Chap. 10, is the free particle. 


558 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



Question 12-10 

Consider a free particle in one dimension in a state represented by a wave packet 
Substitute the expansion of this state function in momentum eigenfunctions into the time- 
dependent Schrodinger equation and derive a differential equation for the coefficients c(p, t). 
Show that your equation is solved by 

c(p,t) = c(p, 0)<r iE '/\ (12.71) 


We now see that the interpretation of <F(p) as the momentum probability amplitude, 
which we introduced rather tentatively in Chap. 4, is just an application of the Generalized 
Born Interpretation (12.62). The probability density for momentum is 

P(p,t) = |c(p,t)| 2 , (12.72) 


so for the free particle , the probability of getting a value between p and p + dp in a 
momentum measurement at any time is 



P(p,t)dp= |c(p, t)\ 2 dp 
= |$(p) e- iB,/t ‘ 
= |$(p)| 2 dp. 


dp 

[for a free particle] 


(12.73a) 

(12.736) 

(12.73c) 


From this result we can easily regain expressions such as (4.78) for the ensemble average 

of momentum, 

/ 

/ oo roo 

\c(p,t)\ 2 pdp = / \$(p)\ 2 pdp. [for a free particle] (12.74) 

-oo 7 — oo 


Mixed Spectra 


Mixed spectra, consisting of both discrete and continuous eigenvalues, are quite com¬ 
mon in the real (microscopic) world, so I want to discuss briefly the extension of the 
Generalized Born Interpretation to an operator with a mixed spectrum. This case is very 
straightforward; all of the basic formulae are just blends of those in Table 12.1. 

Consider, for example, the finite square well of Fig. 12.4. In an investigation of 
the energy of an arbitrary state of this system, our first step would be to expand the wave 
function in eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian. This expansion entails a “sum” 

over all the eigenvalues of 7 i: a true sum over the discrete part and an integral over the 
continuous part, i.e., 



'&{x ) t)= C n( < )i( I ) + 

[ c(E,t)il)E(x)dE 

(12.75) 

y 

all discrete 
eigenvalues 

J 

all continuous 
eigenvalues 



For the spectrum in Fig. 12.4, this looks like 


= Ci(Wi (s) + c 2 {t)'ip 2 {x) + c 3 (t)ip 3 (x) 

rOO 

+ c 4 (t)ip 4 (x) + / c(E , t)ipu (z) dE. 

7 Vo 


(12.76) 


Sec. 12.5 Coping with the Continuum 559 



From this expansion we can easily write down expressions for other relevant 
quantum-mechanical quantities. For example, the probability that in an energy mea¬ 
surement at time t a member system will exhibit the value E n (for n= 1, 2, 3, or 4) is 
|c„(£)| 2 . But the probability that a member will exhibit an energy in the continuum is, 
for a value between E and E + dE, equal to |c(£',f)| 2 dE. The mean energy obtained 
in such a measurement would be 

(E) ( t ) = | Cl (i)| 2 £i + |c 2 (*)| 2 £ 2 + \c 3 (t)\ 2 E 3 

r 3 ° (12 77 ) 

+ \c 4 (t)\ 2 E 4 + / \c(E,t)\ 2 EdE. 

JV o 


And so forth. 

Aha! Insight! (Into Momentum) 

Before we turn to our next trick, solving the time-dependent Schrodinger equation, let’s 
reflect for a moment on what we have done with momentum. Once again we have knitted 
into the growing fabric of quantum mechanics a topic encountered earlier in this book. 
Now, with heightened insight, we know what we are doing. 

By applying the techniques of Chaps. 10 and 11 to momentum, we have put the 
arguments of Chap. 4—which there were based on expediency (the need to introduce 
a localized wave packet to represent the state of a free particle)—on the rock-solid 
foundation of quantum theory. When we used the method of eigenfunction expansion to 
translate the wave function into the language of momentum, we obtained Eq. (12.66), the 
Fourier transform relationship that we used (in an ad hoc way) in Chap. 4. The reason this 
equation is the Fourier transform relation is simply that the momentum eigenfunctions 
(12.65) are precisely the functions that appear in that relation. Ruminate further on the 
connections between this chapter and Chap. 4 as you ponder the handy summary in 
Table 12.2. 18 


TABLE 12.2 TWO VIEWS OF MOMENTUM INFORMATION IN QUANTUM 
MECHANICS. 


Chapter 4 (Free Particle) 

Chapter 12 (General State) 

tf(x,<) = -^= f X $(p)e*'b>*-£0/A d 
V2nh 

$(p) = -yL= tf(.T,0 )e" ipx/fi dx 

y/2^K J -° c 

P(p,0) = |4>(p)| 2 
<P> (0) = jr oc ^(p) P^(P)dp 

vp(.T, f) = c(p, t) Xp( x ) dp 

c(p, *) = f- 0 o Xj(*)’® r (*i 0 dx 

P(p,f) = |c(p,0| 2 
(p) (0 = /HjcfoOl 2 pdp 



18 In Chap. 4 we focused (primarily) on a single system: the free particle. But nowhere in this section 
did we specify a particular system. All our results here apply whether or not the particle is free. But if the 
particle is free, i.e., if V = 0, then Eq. (12.70(7) takes on a particularly simple form, since for the free panicle 
only, the energy is related to the momentum by the simple dispersion relation E = p 2 /(2m). If, on the other 
hand, the particle is not free, then Eq. (I2.70 a) still applies, but the relationship of E to p is, to say the least, 
more complicated. 


560 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 




There is nothing magical or surprising about the appearance here of the formulae 
of Chap. 4. And it is really quite beautiful how all the elements of quantum mechanics 
hang together, how the threads of quantum physics from Part II are woven together by 
the mathematical machinery of Chaps. 10 and 11 to unify quantum theory. Isn’t it? 
(Still, Chap. 13 looms, ominously, on the horizon.) 


12.6 THE ARTFUL DODGE: SOLVING THE TDSE THE EASY WAY 

Wolfe, 

who had moved around the desk 
and into his chair, 
put up a palm at him: 

“Please, Mr. Hobart. 

I think it is always advisable 
to take a short-cut 
when it is feasible.” 

—The Rubber Band 
by Rex Stout 


Using the method of eigenfunction expansion and interpreting the expansion coefficients 
via the Generalized Born Interpretation, we can extract and understand information about 
measurement of any observable from a wave function at the time the measurement takes 
place ... provided we know the wave function. The trouble is, usually we don’t. 

Usually we know at most the Hamiltonian of the system and the initial wave 
function #(a:,0) (see Example 12.6). Without a way to determine \1>(£,£) from this 
initial function, the whole beautiful edifice of the last five sections becomes all but 
useless. 

Since Chap. 6, we have known how to obtain formally, just solve the 

time-dependent Schrodinger equation 

HV = ih4-y (12.78) 

dt 

subject to the known initial condition. But it is facile to claim that this solves our 
predicament, for the TDSE is a very nasty equation indeed. Even for merely one par¬ 
ticle in merely one dimension, it is a second-order partial differential equation in two 
variables: 19 


+ V(*)«(a,t) = ihj-V&t), (12.79) 

the solving of which is assuredly not trivial. 

The one case in which solving (12.79) is trivial is that of a stationary state. If 
^(.t, 0) is an eigenfunction of ii with eigenvalue E , then solutions of the TDSE ex- 

19 I have assumed that we are dealing with a conservative system, so the potential energy in (12.79) 
doesn’t depend on t. (In Volume II we’ll implement a similar procedure, albeit in a more subtle way, to 
cope with non-conservative systems. This step will lead us to a powerful method for calculating approximate 
solutions to complicated time-dependent Schrodinger equations called time-dependent perturbation theory.] 
Somewhat less realistically. I’ll also assume we have solved the lime-independent Schrodinger equation for 
the system, so we know the eigenfunctions {t/»,i(.x’)} and their eigenvalues E n . 


Sec. 12.6 The Artful Dodge: Solving the TDSE the Easy Way 561 



ist that are separable into a product of a space-dependent function (the Hamiltonian 
eigenfunction) and a time-dependent function (the usual exponential time factor): 

*„(*,«) = (12.80) 


But if ^(rc,0) is not a Hamiltonian eigenfunction, then t) is not separable. 
Understanding this statement is the key to discovering how to conquer non-stationary 
states. To begin, let’s recall that we can expand any wave function at any time in the 
complete set of eigenfunctions of Ti. Denoting the projections of this state by c„(£), we 
have 20 


^(M) = [t)ip n (x) 

n 


[expansion observable: E ] 


(12.81) 


Although each term in (12.81) is a product of a space-dependent function and a time- 
dependent function, we must, in general, sum several such terms—maybe an infinite 
number of terms—in order to obtain a representation of ^(x,t). So this wave function 
is certainly not separable. 

To see if we could use this eigenfunction expansion to solve the TDSE, consider 
the projection c„(£), 


c n (t) = (\J) n | #(£)) = [ ip* l {x)^(x,t)dx. 

J — o o 


(12.82) 


At first glance, the prospects look grim. To determine ^(x, t) from (12.81), we must 
know the projections at time t. But according to (12.82), to determine these projections 
we must know the very function we seek, ^(x, t). 

On further reflection, we realize that Eq. (12.81) is a boon. Think about what 
happens if we substitute this expansion for ty(x, t) in the TDSE (12.79). The Hamiltonian 
acts on each eigenfunction in this sum, returning E n if) n (x ) and thereby eliminating from 
the Schrodinger equation the derivatives with respect to x. What results is a set of 
equations in the time variable only for the projections c„(£), equations that are very easy 
to solve. Once we know the projections as functions of time, we know the state function 
(12.81). We have solved the TDSE without actually solving the TDSE! Let’s now work 
out this wizardry in detail. 

Equations for the Energy Amplitudes 

First we substitute the expansion (12.81) into the TDSE (12.78), viz., 

r\ 

H ^2c n >{t)ip n >(x) = in— Y^Cn'{t)i) n >(x). (12.83) 

ii ' « # 

_ [So my final result, Eq. (12.88), will look pretty_I!m_using nLforJhe (dummy) summation 
index in this derivation.] The Hamiltonian does not alter functions of t only, just as d/dt 
does not alter functions of x only, so we can write (12.83) as 


20 To simplify the notation, I’ll assume that the energy spectrum is purely discrete, so the eigenvalues 
and eigenfunctions can be labelled by it = 1,2,.... Results analogous to those of this section can be written 
down for continuous and mixed spectra using the generalizations of § 12.5. 


562 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 




(12.84a) 


Y^Cn'(t)H^n'(x) = ih^2^ nt {x)j t C n >(t). 

n 1 n' 

When the Hamiltonian acts on its eigenfunctions, this equation simplifies to 

Y^cAt)E n ^Ax) = (12.84 ft) 

ii' »' 


Fine. How can we extract from (12.84ft) an equation for a single projection c n (t)l 
We must somehow evaluate the sums over n' so as to select n' = n, and we must get 
rid of the ^-dependent functions, the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions. Evidently, we need a 
Dirac Delta function. And I’ll bet you know where we can get one. 

Orthonormality. The rc-dependent functions in this equation are eigenfunctions of 
a Hermitian operator and hence are orthonormal, i.e ., 





7p*(x)'ijj }l >(x)dx = 6 nM >. 


(12.85) 


To exploit this handy fact, we multiply both sides of (12.84ft) by ip^ix) and integrate 
the resulting equation over all values of x. 

From this point. I’m sure you can follow the rest of the derivation: 


^c n '(t)E n '$l(x)ij) n .(x) = ih^2ip*(x)il) n >(x)^- 

n 1 n 1 


Y c„> (t)E n > 



ij>h(x)ipn'{x) dx = ih Y 

n' 


dc n . f™ 

dt y.oc 


ll>*n{x)l}) n '{x) dx 


E n c n (t) — ih 


dc n 

dt 


(12.86a) 

(12.86ft) 

(12.86c) 


Equation (12.86c) is a first-order, ordinary differential equation for the projection c„(f) 
of the state ^ at time t on the Hamiltonian eigenfunction ip n (x): 


d i 

~ ~Yi 


n — 1,2,... 


(12.87) 


There is one such equation for each eigenfunction (re¬ 
integrating both sides of Eqs. (12.87) from the initial time t = 0, we obtain their 
solutions 


c n (t) = c„{ 0)e ,E " t/h n = 0,1,2,... 


( 12 . 88 ) 


Well, that result certainly-is simple—And it leads straight to the solution of the TDSE for 
time t. Here’s why. We can calculate the projections c„ at t = 0 from the initial wave 
function, which (by hypothesis) we know: 


c»(0) = {il>„ | *(0)) = f if)*(x)'&(x,0)dx. 
J — rx 


71 — 1 , 2 ,... 


(12.89) 


Sec. 12.6 The Artful Dodge: Solving the TDSE the Easy Way 563 




Having done so, we merely multiply each projection by the familiar time factor e~ iEnt f h 
and voila! The expansion (12.81) is the desired wave function. 

Before going on, let’s cogitate a bit. The coefficients {c„(0),n = 1,2,3,...} of 
(12.89) represent the state (in the energy representation). The simple equation (12.88) 
tells us how to “propagate” the state to any time t > 0. From the energy representation 
of the state at this time we can easily determine the position representation, the wave 
function via our original expansion, Eq. (12.81). 

So by “translating” the problem of finding the wave function from its initial condi¬ 
tion into the language of energy, we have dodged entirely the onerous chore of solving the 
TDSE! We now have two ways to solve the fundamental problem of quantum mechanics, 
one direct, the other roundabout: 

Position Representation -» Energy Representation 

_ _ y \._ _ y 


*(*.0) {c„(0) = <V„ |*(0)>} 





Example 12.7. Easy Evaluation of State Functions 

In § 12.4 we left unfinished two applications of the Generalized Born Interpretation. In 
Example 12.5 we considered a hexatrine molecule, modeled by an infinite square well, 
in a non-stationary state. To predict the possible outcomes of an energy measurement (at 
t = 0) on this system, we expanded the initial wave function in Hamiltonian eigenfunctions, 
obtaining 


*(*.<>) = J^x(x-L)= jr *.(*)• (12.90) 

' H=1 ' ' 

>1 odd 


From that example, we have all the information needed to write down the solution of 
the TDSE for any time t > 0. We have determined the projections of this state at t = 0, and, 
from Chap. 7, we know the eigenvalues E„ = n 2 n 2 h 2 /(2mL 2 ). Ergo the wave function is 


n = l x ' 


(12.91) 


In the second example of § 12.4, Example 12.6, we deduced from energy mea¬ 
surements on an ensemble of CO molecules that the (non-stationary) initial state could be 
represented by the wave - function-[Eq-(T2-56)] 


*<«.<» = 02.92) 

where <5o and <5i are (unknown) phase constants. I then asked you to guess the form of the 
wave function for t > 0. I hope you guessed 


564 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 





¥(*,0) = \lJo ei6o Mx)e-^ ot/2 + y^* Ml ^ 1 (*)e" Mwol/a . 

for, as we now know, this is the correct answer. 

Almost embarrassingly easy, isn’t it? 


(12.93) 

^ - 


The Physics of Expansion in Hamiltonian Eigenfunctions 


The solution of the TDSE by expansion in Hamiltonian eigenfunctions is, as you might 
imagine, a wonderful problem-solving tool. But it is also rich with important physics. 
For one thing, it clearly reveals the explicit connection between the initial condition and 
the state function: 


*(M) = | 

n 


(12.94) 


Equation 12.94 is a succinct mathematical statement of causality in quantum mechanics 
(c./.. Chap. 6). Recall that in the microscopic world, cause and effect take on a strange 
new form: the only true causality is between complex functions at different times, 
functions that do not themselves have any physical reality. We now see that the wave 
function depends on its progenitor, the initial state, in a very special way: through the 
initial energy probability amplitudes (ip n | 'P(O)). 

For another thing, the expansion (12.94) returns us to one of the most important 
underpinnings of quantum physics: the Principle of Superposition. To highlight this 
feature, let’s write Eq. (12.94) in terms of the stationary-state wave functions (12.80), 


x,t ) = 5>(0)*H(*,i). 

It 


(12.95) 


From this vantage point, we view the projections c„ (0) as “mixture coefficients” in the 
superposition of stationary states that is the non-stationary state represented by ty(x,t). 


Question 12-11 

Redo the above derivation for the special case that '!'(&’, 0) is an eigenfunction of H —say, 
with eigenvalue E m . Explain briefly why, as claimed earlier in this section, separability of 
follows only in this special case. 


I have boxed Eqs. (12.81), (12.94), and (12.95) to emphasize the importance of 
thinking about and remembering all of these perspectives on eigenfunction expansions. 
They tie the findings of this chapter to the rest of quantum mechanics. We have known 
since first we laid out the postulates of quantum physics (Part II) that inherent in a 
(general) wave function are many possible outcomes of an energy measurement—not, 
as we know now, arbitrary outcomes, but rather many eigenvalues of H. This is the 
essence of the concept of a superposition state. The probability that upon measurement 
at t, a member system will actually exhibit one of these values ijTalso buried inThe wave 
function—and we now know how to get at it. 

Aside: The Energy and Other Representations. It is very important to under¬ 
stand the critical role played by the energy representation in our simplification of 
the TDSE. We could have expanded ^(x, t) in the complete set of eigenfunctions 
of any Hermitian operator—say, (x 9 (a:)} °f some operator Q. But substitution of 


Sec. 12.6 The Artful Dodge: Solving the TDSE the Easy Way 565 





the resulting expansion into the TDSE would lead to a far more complicated set of 
equations for the projections c„(i). In § 12.9 we’ll pursue this matter further, deriving 
the following equations for the projections of ^ on eigenfunctions of an arbitrary 
observable Q: 

j t c„m = -j t J2(x„\H\xn')c,At)- n = 1,2,3,... (12.96) 

n ' 

See the problem? The equation we must solve for a particular projection, say c„(t), 
is coupled by matrix elements of H to equations for other projections, c n >(t). Such 
sets of coupled equations can be solved, as we’ll learn in Volume II, but only with 
considerably more exertion than is necessary if we choose Q = Ti for our expansion. 


Question 12-12 


Derive Equations (12.96). What simplifications to these equations, if any, follow in the 
special case that the observable Q is a constant of the motion? 

Implications for Energy Measurements 

In this section I have emphasized the role of the projections c n (t) = (ip„ | \L(£)) as 
tools for solving the Schrodinger equation. But, of course, these quantities are also 
energy probability amplitudes , and their special form, c„(f) = c„(0) e~ lEnt / h , tells us 
something important about energy measurements: their results don’t depend on time. 

In such a measurement, the probability of obtaining an eigenvalue E n is 

P(E„) = |c„(t)| 2 (12.97a) 


M0)| 2 . 


(12.977?) 

(12.97c) 


It’s clear what happened to the time. Because of the special, complex exponential 
form of the time factor in the energy probability amplitudes, the squared moduli of these 
amplitudes—the energy probabilities—are independent of the measurement time. Be care¬ 
ful: this result does not pertain to probabilities for an arbitrary observable. A convenient 
summary contrasting the energy-related properties of stationary and non-stationary states 
appears in Table 12.3. 


Question 12-13 

Use the form of the energy probability amplitudes and Eq. (12.18) for the ensemble average 
of energy to prove that the energy of a conservative microscopic system is conserved. 


An Exhortation 


I hope the discussion in this section—and the example in § 12.6—will convince you of 
the power of the method of eigenfunction expansion as a tool for solving the TDSE. The 
good news islfiatlhis method can be applied to a wide variety of differential equationsr 
Look carefully at the steps. We expanded a function [\P(a; } t)] of two variables (x 
and t) in a complete set in one of the variables ( x ). We then substituted the expansion 
into the multi-variable partial differential equation for the function (the TDSE) and used 
orthonormality of the complete set [{V>„(z)}] to eliminate entirely one variable (re). The 
result was a set of simpler equations in a single variable. 


566 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



TABLE 12.3 ENERGY-RELATED INFORMATION CONCERNING 
STATIONARY AND NON-STATIONARY STATES. 



Stationary 

Non-Stationary 

tf(x, t) 

wave function 

H*n = EnVn 

HV = ih-jj- t v 

energy probability* 

P ( E n') = 

P(E„,,t) = |«V 1 *(i)| 2 

mean energy* 

(E) = E n 

<i5>(0 = £jW»l*(‘)l s 6. 

energy uncertainty* 

A E{t) = 0 

A£ > 0 


‘Independent of time. 


These steps can easily be extended to other partial differential equations, in more 
than two variables, and to complete sets of observables other than H. The only re¬ 
quirement is that the operator that defines the complete set be Hermitian, so that the 
eigenfunctions in the set are orthogonal. 

In the interests of honesty, I should note that we have greatly simplified the math¬ 
ematical problem, but at a certain cost. Rather than face a single multi-variable partial 
differential equation , we must cope with a set of single-variable ordinary differential 
equations. But solving the latter is (almost) always simpler than solving the former— 
which is what makes this method so powerful. 

Anyway, my message is: the technique of subduing partial differential equations 
via expansion in a complete set of orthonormal eigenfunctions is one of the two or three 
most powerful weapons in a physicist’s armament. It will get you out of tight spots time 
and time again, not just in quantum physics, but in almost every physics course you take. 
Do not fail to commit it to memory. 


*12.7 THE AMAZING EXPANDING SQUARE WELL (AN EXAMPLE) 


Science isn’t certainty, Sergo, 
it’s probability. 

—John Bishop 
in Artifact 
by Gregory Benford 


I now want to introduce one of the most remarkable, confounding examples in quantum 
physics: the effect on an observable—here, the energy—of a sudden change in the 
potential of a system. The system we’ll consider, a particle in an infinite square well, 
is very simple; but nonetheless, the behavior it manifests is a paradigm for complicated 
physical processes such as beta decay. Stay alert. This one will test your quantum 
intuition to the fullest. 

First, let’s apply our classical intuition to a macroscopic counterpart of this system. 
Suppose a billiard ball (of mass m) bounces elastically (in one dimension) between the 


Sec. 12.7 The Amazing Expanding Square Well (An Example) 567 




fixed walls of a box of width L, as in Fig. 12.5a. 21 The particle, being macroscopic, has 
an energy, which depends on its velocity v as E = mv 2 /2. 

At t = 0 the right wall suddenly moves to the right, causing the box to expand—to 
be specific, suppose it moves from x = L to x = 3 L, as in Fig. 12.5b. (By “sudden,” I 
mean effectively instantaneous—/>., the change in the potential occurs during so short 
a time interval that, in effect, the position of the particle can be considered unchanged 
during the expansion.) What happens to the energy of the particle? Right—absolutely 
nothing. The particle’s energy is independent of the size of the box, so the expansion 
has no effect on it. The particle just traverses a larger orbit as it bounces back and forth 
in the expanded box. 


(a) 




tb> 


Figure 12.5 A bouncing macroscopic ball 
in one dimension (a) before and (b) after a 
sudden change at t = 0 in the position of 
the right wall. As a consequence of this 
change in the potential, the trajectory of the 
particle changes (in a predictable way), but 
its total energy does not change. 


An Expansion in the Microverse 

Consider now a microscopic box, the infinite square well of width L shown in Fig. 12.6a. 22 
A particle in an energy eigenstate at t = 0 has a well-defined energy E n =n 2 ir 2 h 2 /(2mL 2 ). 
If nothing happens to the system, the state evolves just like any other stationary state: 
at t > 0 the wave function is ty n (x,t) = ^> n {x)e~ tEnt f h . At any time, the state is 
an energy eigenstate, and an energy measurement will yield the value E n with zero 
uncertainty. The mean of the results of such a measurement is (E) ( t ) = E n . Simple 
enough. 

But suppose the system changes (instantaneously) at t = 0. To keep the analysis 
simple, let’s set up the initial condition (before the change) so that the particle is in the 
ground stationary state of the well of width L; i.e. 23 

(z, 0) = L) (x ) = sin (t. [0 < z < L] (12.98) 

Outside the box, of course, this wave function is zero. 

At t = 0 the box suddenly expands, as in Fig. 12.6b, the right wall abruptly moving 
to x = 3 L. What is the state of the particle at some time after the sudden expansion? Is 
it still an energy eigenstate? What is its wave function? 

21 In one of those idealizations so beloved of textbook authors, we could imagine the ball sliding 
without friction along a perfectly straight wire in the absence of gravity. The perfectly elastic collision, too, is 
an idealization. 

22 For consistency with Example 12.5, I’ll put .r = 0 at the left wall of the box. Obviously, the physics 
of the states of the system doesn’t depend on where 1 put the origin of coordinates. 

2a Because we will consider two square wells of different widths. I’ll label the Hamiltonian eigenfunc¬ 
tions and eigenvalues, the stationary state energies, with a superscript that indicates the width of the well. 


568 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 





(a) 



(b> 


Figure 12.6 The infinite square well: 

(a) before and (b) after a sudden expansion 
at t = 0. As a consequence of this change 
in the potential energy, the state of the 
particle (not shown) changes in strange and 
remarkable ways. 


Erroneous Answers 


Some novice quantum mechanics answer the last question with the wave function for 
the original well, ip[ L \x) e~ tE i l / h , arguing that since the initial state was an energy 
eigenstate of the “unexpanded well,” so should be the subsequent state. 

This answer should make you very nervous. The equation that governs evolution 
of the state from the moment of expansion to time t is the time-dependent Schrodinger 
equation of the expanded well , />., the Hamiltonian of this system is that of the expanded 
well, not of the initial well. 24 The point is that ip[ L \x) is not an eigenfunction of this 

Hamiltonian, so the wave function i)[ L \x) e~ iE \ L)t f h is not appropriate to the expanded 
well. 

Abandoning this guess, we might look for guidance at the allowed energies of the 
particle after expansion. From § 12.4 we know that these values are just the eigenvalues 
of a well of width 3 L, 


. 2 n 2 h 2 , 2 TT 2 k 
3 2m(3L) 2 3 18mL 2 ' J = 1 > 2 > 3 > 


(12.99) 


24 For the expanding square well, the difference between the systems before and after expansion is the 
boundary conditions on the eigenfunctions, e.g.. 


for a well of width L: 


*h L Hx = 0 ) = 0 

ri L) (z = L) = 0 


for a well of width 3 L: 


ipi L) (x = 0 ) = 0 
4> [ n L) {x = 3L) = 0 


This is, I admit, an unfortunate (although minor) complicating feature of this example. It does not arise if we 
consider, say, a simple harmonic oscillator whose natural frequency suddenly changes at t = 0. 


Sec. 12.7 The Amazing Expanding Square Well (An Example) 569 



The corresponding eigenfunctions are 


■ 3 = ( 12 . 100 ) 

Energy level diagrams for wells of width L and 3 L are shown side by side in Fig. 12.7. 
Lo and behold, the energy of the particle before expansion — the ground state energy 
e\ L) = TT 2 h 2 /(2mL 2 ) of the well of width L —is equal to the energy of the second 
excited state (j = 3) of the expanded well , E^ 3L) . From this observation, one might 
guess that the system at t > 0 is in the second excited state of the expanded well and 
that consequently its state function is ip^ L \x) e~ tE * )t / h . What do you think? Does 
that sound right? 



Well width = L Well width = 3Z. 


Figure 12.7 The first few stationary-state energies of infinite square wells of width L 
(left diagram) and 3 L (right diagram). The purely accidental coincidence of e [ L * and 
can lead the unwary astray. 


570 


Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



Question 12-14 

Before you read further, work this very simple exercise. Suppose the well expands at t = 0 
to a width of 3L/2. Write down the equation for the allowed energies Ef L,2) . For what 
value of j does E[ l) coincide with one of these allowed energies? Now answer the question 
I posed above. 

This guess should trouble you. Underlying it is the assumption that the state of the 
particle at t > 0 that evolves from the initial condition \l/(x, 0) = ip[ L \x) is identical 
to the state that would have evolved from the initial condition ^(x.O) = (x). The 

latter initial wave function would be appropriate only if the width of the well had always 
been 3L. But that’s not right: those aren’t the circumstances of the problem. Initially 
our particle wasn’t in an expanded well; it was in a well of width L. Surely this fact 
will affect the state after expansion. 


The Correct Answer 


Evidently something rather subtle is going on. Simple intuitive arguments are leading us 
astray. We would be well advised, then, to analyze this problem systematically, sticking 
rigorously to the procedure for solving the TDSE we laid out in § 12.6. The analysis 
isn’t mysterious, but it does demand care and thought at each step. 

At the heart of our procedure is the expansion of the state function in eigenfunctions 
of the Hamiltonian. The coefficients in that expansion, the projections of # on these 
eigenfunctions, have a simple exponential time dependence that is determined from the 
initial wave function and the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian. The only tricky part is 
determining which eigenfunctions and eigenvalues to use. Let s see how this goes. 

After expansion, the width of the box is 3L, so we should expand ^(x, t) in 
eigenfunctions (12.100), i.e., 


¥(x,i) = ^Cj(t)^ 3L \x). [expansion observable: E ] (12.101) 

j =1 

The projections Cj(t ) are proportional to an exponential that includes the eigenvalues of 
the expanded well 25 

Cj (t) = Cj ( 0)e- iE ? L)t/h . j = 1,2,3,... (12.102) 

Comes now the tough question: what is the expression for the projections c, (0)? 
According to Eq. (12.89) the j th projection is the integral over all space of the complex 
conjugate of the j th eigenfunction of the expanded well times the initial wave function 
(12.98): 


Cj(0) = I $ (°)) 



*(x) ^(x,0) dx 
(x) {x) dx. 


(12.103a) 

(12.103/;) 


(12.103c) 


25 If it is not clear as brook water why we use E rather than Ej ^ in this expression, go back and 
study carefully the derivation of (12.88). Do not pass this point until you understand it. 


Sec. 12.7 The Amazing Expanding Square Well (An Example) 571 



There are two possible traps in Eqs. (12.103). First, we must carefully follow the 
prescription of § 12.6 and insert for the initial wave function in (12.103/?) the ground- 
sf ate eigenfunction of the unexpanded well (not an eigenfunction of the expanded well). 
Second, the limits of integration on the integral in (12.1036) are changed in (12.103c), 
for this integral is cut off at x = 0 and x = L by the initial wave function (12.98), which 
is zero outside the box. (Even fairly adept quantum mechanics sometimes goof up the 
limits of integration in problems like this one.) The rest is algebra. 

Now we must evaluate the projections Eq. (12.103c), 



(12.104) 


The obvious thing to do at this point is to change the variable of integration from x to 
u — ttx/L, viz.. 


C A 0) = 


[T [2L r . (j U 
3L \ L n J 0 sm \3 


sin u du. 


(12.105) 


(Notice that I have changed the upper limit of integration accordingly.) A trip to your 
friendly neighborhood integral table yields 


cj( 0 ) = 


1 

71 

18 sin (§”) 
ttv/3 j 2 - 9 


3 = 3 
3* 3 


(12.106) 


Aside: Filling in the Gaps. Want to see the details? There’s not much to them. 
First we combine the sine functions, using a familiar trig identity, to obtain for the 
integral in (12.105) 




(12.1070) 

(12.1076) 

(12.107c) 


The integral for j = 3 is particularly simple: 


/a 


• 2 , 7T 

Sill udu = —. 


(12.107c/) 


The integral for j ± 3 is not particularly simple, so let’s simplify it. Manipulating 
the sine functions in—(12.107c) (more trig identities) and putting both terms over 
(j ~ 3 ){j + 3) = j 2 - 9, we obtain 


h = -9 


sin (5*0 

j 2 - 9 ' 


3 #3 


Equations (12.107r/) and (12.108) lead immediately to (12.106). 


(12.108) 


Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



The projections (12.106), when multiplied by the exponential time factors and 
the appropriate Hamiltonian eigenfunctions, determine the wave function x,t ) at any 
t > 0 [Eq. (12.101)]. Clearly, more than one of these projections are non-zero (in fact, 
an infinite number of them are non-zero). So the state represented by this function is not 
stationary, i.e., it is not an energy eigenstate. 

Question 12-15 

Write out the first five terms in the expansion for using explicit expressions for the 

energies and eigenfunctions. 

The projections (12.106) are also the representation of the state ^ in the language 
of energy— i.e., they are the energy probability amplitudes. The number |c 7 (0)| 2 is the 
probability that in an energy measurement at t > 0 on this state of the particle in the 
expanded well , we’ll obtain the eigenvalue Ef L \ I’ve tabulated some of these energies 
and their respective probabilities in Table 12.4. 


TABLE 12.4 ENERGIES, PROJECTIONS, 
AND PROBABILITIES FOR A STATE 
OF THE EXPANDED INFINITE WELL." 


j 

E { j L) 

Ef L) 

c j (0) 

P{Ef L) ) 

1 

1.0 

0.11 

0.358 

0.128 

2 

4.0 

0.44 

0.573 

0.328 

3 

9.0 

1.00 

0.577 

0.333 

4 

16.0 

1.78 

0.409 

0.167 

5 

25.0 

2.78 

0.179 

0.032 

6 

36.0 

4.00 

0.0 

0.0 

7 

49.0 

5.44 

0.071 

0.005 

8 

64.0 

7.11 

0.055 

0.003 

9 

81.0 

9.00 

0.0 

0.0 

10 

100.0 

11.11 

-0.031 

0.001 

11 

121.0 

13.44 

-0.026 

0.0007 

12 

144.0 

16.00 

0.0 

0.0 


"Energies in units of 7r 2 /i 2 /(2mJL 2 ). 


Let’s return now to a question I posed at the beginning of this section. Before 
the well expanded, the particle had a (sharp) energy e[ l) = n 2 h 2 /(2mL 2 ). What is 
the probability of a member particle exhibiting this value in an energy measurement at 
t > 0, after expansion ? 

This energy is E^ i,J \ and according to Table 12.4 the corresponding probability is 
P(E-f L ^) = 0.333. Hmmm ... not even 50% of the systems in our ensemble exhibit 
this energy. 20 Some energies, such as e)? l \ although “allowed,” do not appear in an 

2G Note carefully: a member lhat exhibits this energy in a measurement at t > 0 was not (immediately 
prior to the measurement) in an energy eigenstate with this energy. We know from the distribution of energies 
in Table 12.4 lhat the state of the ensemble immediately before we measure the energy is not an energy 
eigenstate (recall Table 12.3): the energy uncertainty is positive [AE(t) > 0] for t > 0. (We’ll consider the 
energy uncertainty, which exhibits some disquieting behavior, in a minute.) 


Sec. 12.7 The Amazing Expanding Square Well (An Example) 573 




energy measurement on this state, because the projections of the state function on the 
corresponding eigenfunctions are zero. Still, rather a lot of energies do show up in the 
measurement. The probabilities P(Ej appear to drop off rapidly with increasing 
j. Nonetheless—and contrary to our classical intuition—there is a small chance that a 
member of the ensemble will exhibit an energy much larger than the particle’s value 
prior to expansion of the well. 

Statistical Quantities of the Expanded Well 

The sudden change in the potential at t = 0 brought about a radical change in the 
quantum state of the particle in the well. To gain further insight into this change, let s 
compute the average value and uncertainty in the energy at t > 0. Their initial values, 
of course, are 


<£)( 0 ) = £< L) 

A£(0) = 0 


[before expansion]. 


(12.109) 


Unfortunately, this calculation is complicated whether we use the integral or series 
forms of the required expectation values, ( E ) and (jE 2 ). In such cases, a physicist will 
sometimes abandon the quest for the exact values of these quantities and settle for 
numerical approximations to them. One could compute such approximations either by 
integrating numerically the integral forms (quadrature) or by summing a finite number 
of terms in each series. In the latter case, we must include enough terms to identify the 
value to which the sum is tending with increasing number of tenns. Because we have not 
considered this gambit before, I want to show you how to evaluate the mean value and 
uncertainty in the energy by summing truncated series in the energy amplitudes Cj(0). 

Question 12-16 

Write down explicit expressions for the integral forms of {E){ 0) and (£ 2 }(0) for the 
state of the system after expansion. Why are the values of these quantities not equal to 
Eqs. (12.109)? 

The series for (E) and ( E 2 ) include an infinite number of tenns [see Table 12.3] 
unless the projections Cj(0) have a very special behavior: unless there exists a “maximum 
value” j max beyond which all coefficients cj(0) are zero. Examining (12.106) we find 
that, unhappily, this is not the case for the problem at hand. 

We could, of course, try to sum the resulting expressions exactly using the theory 
of infinite series, and in this simple case that strategem would work. But suppose it 
didn’t. Or suppose we can’t figure out the answer. Or suppose we have an answer and 
want to check it. In any case, we would like to estimate the values of (E) and A E. To 
get an idea of these values, we’ll “truncate” the infinite series for (E) and (E 2 ) at a 
fairly small number of tenns and see what we get. That is, we’ll introduce a teiminal 
value j max and calculate 


Jmax 


(E) = £ M0)| 2 Ej 


j =1 

Jmrxx 


(# 2 ) = M°)l 2 E j‘ 

j =1 


(12.110a) 

( 12 . 110 /;) 


574 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



Then the uncertainty follows from the usual formula 




(12.110c) 


The results of these calculations for increasing values of j max appear in Fig. 12.8. 



Figure 12.8 Finite-series approximations to the average energy (solid curve) and the 
energy uncertainty (dashed curve) for the state represented by the energy amplitudes 
(12.106). The horizontal axis shows the maximum value of j included in the series 
for (E) and ^E 2 )—see Eqs. (12.110). Note that the units of the vertical axis are 

tt 2 Ti 2 /(2mL 2 ). Therefore 1.0 on the vertical axis is the value e[ L * of the energy of 
the particle before the well expands. 


Let’s look first at the mean energy. The trend is clear. As the number of terms in 
(12.1lOo) increases, the average energy approaches the value n 2 h 2 /(2mL 2 ), i.e., 


(E)- - 

Jn\nx—*OC 


7r 2 ft 2 

2 mL 2 ' 


(12.111o) 


Remarkably, this is the energy of the particle before the well expanded at t = 0, /.<?., 
the eigenvalue of the Hamiltonian of the well of width L that corresponds to the initial 
condition ^(x.O) = if>[ L \x). 27 


27 This result is not a fluke. Had the particle initially been in any eigenstate of the well of width L, 
with energy E, { , L \ its mean value at t > 0, after expansion, would be 

(E) = El L) [for the expanded well]. 

This result holds no matter what the width of the expanded well. [See J. G. Cordes, D. Kiang, and J. Nakajima, 
Amer. Jour. Phys., 52, 155 (1984).] 


Sec. 12.7 The Amazing Expanding Square Well (An Example) 575 



Equally remarkable—and far more alarming—is the behavior displayed in Fig. 12.8 
by the uncertainty A E: as the number of terms included in (E) and ( E 2 ) increases, the 
uncertainty seems to diverge! Indeed, a detailed numerical analysis shows that 

A E- - >oo. (12.1116) 

jmax—*00 

[The same distressing behavior is found if the particle is initially in any eigenstate of 
the unexpanded well— i.e., for ^(z,0) = ifji L \x). The energy uncertainty of the state 
after expansion is finite only if the initial state is non-stationary. (See Pblm. 12.4.)] As 
a consequence of the expansion, the particle has wound up in a state of maximal energy 
uncertainty. 

Question 12-17 

Verify Eqs. (12.110) and the appalling Eqs. (12.111) by continuing the analysis in Fig. 12.8 
to at least j m&x = 20. 

Question 12-18 

1. Look at Fig. 12.7. Where, in relation to the energy levels of the system before expansion, 
is the energy of the most probable state after expansion? 

2. Does the mean value of the energy change as a consequence of the expansion? Can you 
figure out why or why not? 

3. We’ve seen that some members of the ensemble will exhibit an energy after expansion 
that is greater than the energy of the system before expansion. Discuss the implications 
of this finding for the law of conservation of energy. 

This example will repay your careful perusal and considered contemplation. In 
addition to rather elaborately illustrating the powerhouse method of eigenfunction expan¬ 
sion, it illustrates the nest of counter-intuitive phenomena into which quantum mechanics 
sometimes leads us. And it reminds us of the marvels and wonders that await us in the 
microworld. 


*12.8 MOMENTUM REDUX: THE CASE OF THE CONTINUUM 
CONTINUED 

Earlier in this chapter we learned how to use the Generalized Born Interpretation to 
extract probabilistic information from state functions (§ 12.2-12.5). We also learned 
how to use the method of eigenfunction expansion to obtain these functions from the 
TDSE (§ 12.6-12.7) and how to translate them into the languages of various observables. 
These strategies are among the most important in this book. Here I want to tie them 
together with an example in which we contend with a more general problem and a more 
general quantum state than that of the previous section. 

Consider a simple harmonic oscillator that is initially in a non-stationary state 
represented by the (initial) wave function 0). 28 Suppose that at time t > 0, the 
linear momentum of the oscillator is measured. We want to predict the probability that 
a member of an ensemble of such oscillators will give a value between p and p + dp. 
How do we proceed? Ultimately we must get our hands on the momentum probability 

28 In § 9.10 we treated one such state—a “sloshing” state—and discovered the periodic behavior of its 
position probability and properties. For deep insight into sloshing states, see Pblm. 12.5. 

576 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



amplitude c(p, t), for the squared modulus of this quantity is the probability density we 
need. But this problem is complicated by the difficulty in determining the wave function 
at time t from which we calculate this amplitude. That is, first we must determine 
the wave function W(x y t) at the measurement time, from the initial condition ^(a;,0). 
Different languages are appropriate to each of these steps: 

Step 1. Solve the TDSE: use the energy representation (§ 12.5). 

Step 2. Predict results of momentum measurement: use the momentum repre¬ 
sentation (§ 12.4). 

Let’s take up with the second task first. According to the Generalized Born Inter¬ 
pretation, we can calculate the momentum probability density from the representation of 
the state in the language of momentum, i.e., 

P(p,t) = \c(p,t)\ 2 . (12.112) 

The projection c(p, t ) of the state ^ on a momentum eigenfunction \p with eigenvalue 
p —the momentum probability amplitude—appears in the eigenfunction expansion 
/*°c 

^(x,t) = / c(p, t)x P {x) dp [expansion observable: p ], (12.113a) 

J-oc 

and is related to the wave function at time t by 

c(P>0 = <Xp|4'(i)}- (12.1136) 

We know the momentum eigenfunctions in (12.113a); they are the familiar pure- 
momentum-state functions of Eq. (12.65). But what about the state function at t > 0? 

The easiest way to determine this function is to work in the language of energy 
(§ 12.6). We can easily write down the solution of the TDSE using the energy represen¬ 
tation of the state, viz., 

OO 

t) = ^ c n (0) e~ lE,,t / h iJj n (x) [expansion observable: E]. (12.114) 

n—0 

The energies in the exponential time factor are 

E n = (n+^Jhwo n = 0,l,2,... (12.115) 

The Hamiltonian eigenfunctions , tp n (x) are those of Table 9.6. And the projections of 
the initial state on these energy eigenfunctions are 

c„(0) = (</■„ | f(0)) n = 0,1,2. (12.116) 

One important feature of Eqs. (12.114)—(12.116) may seem obvious when I state 
it but is a frequent source of confusion: the energy probability amplitudes c„(<) = 
c„( 0)e~ lE,,t ^ h are not the same as the momentum probability amplitudes c(p,t). The 
two sets (c„ (0); n = 1,2,...} and { c(p , t)\ -oo < v < oc} represent the the same state 
in different languages. Just as words that represent the concept “love” in French (amour) 
and in English are different, so the quantities that represent the state ^ in the languages 
of momentum and energy are different. 

But it’s easy to derive a relationship between the two representations by substi¬ 
tuting the expansion in energy eigenfunctions, Eq. (12.114), into the expression for the 
momentum amplitude, Eq. (12.113b); to wit: 


Sec. 12.8 Momentum Redux: The Case of the Continuum Continued 577 



(12.117) 



Notice that c(p, t) does not have the simple form of a constant times e lEt ! h . This simple 
form obtains only in special cases, such as a stationary state. 


Question 12-19 

Show that if the system is initially in the m th energy eigenstate, then the momentum proba¬ 
bility amplitude is 

c{p,t) = | [system in m th stationary state] (12.118) 


Example 12.8. Momentum Measurements on a SHO 

Let’s get specific. To make life easier, suppose we are handed the expansion of the wave 
packet ^(x,0) in Hamiltonian eigenfunctions. 


ty(x, 0) = tpo{x) + ipi ( x) 
v 2 J 


(12.119) 


This function represents the state in the position representation. Its representation in the 
language of energy, which we’ll use to solve the TDSE, is therefore 


C (0) = ± 

(12.120a) 

c,(0) = 7! 

(12.120 b) 

c„(0) = 0. n > 1 

(12.120c) 


Question 12-20 

Write down the wave function (in the position representation) that represents this state 
at times t > 0. 

Question 12-21 

In an energy measurement at t > 0, what values would be found, and with what 
probabilities? 

Now, to predict the results of a measurement of momentum, we insert the energy 
amplitudes (12.120) into Eq. (12.117) for the momentum amplitude c{p,t), which reduces 
to just two terms, 

c(p,t) = Co (0)<r iEo "" i (x,, | *> + c,(0)e- ,El ' /r, (x,. | Vi) 

(12.121a) 

= * | tf’o) + ^e- i “'" 2 (x„ | ^i>. (12.121ft) 

There remains only to evaluate the integrals 

(x„ I = r e- 1 '"'*Mx)dx ( 12 . 122 ) 

v 27m J 

578 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 




Tor n = 0 and I. This explicit expression reveals these integrals to be the inverse Fourier 
transforms of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions ip„ (re), a result we could have anticipated from 
Chap. 4. For n = 0 and n = 1 , the particular cases that appear in (12.121), these integrals 
are easily evaluated, by recourse to a Table of Fourier Transforms, as 2!) 



(12.123<v) 

(12.123/;) 


The constant f3 is (Table 9.3) (3 = \J mw« fh. 

We can now calculate the probability of obtaining a value of momentum between p 
and p + dp. We merely insert the integrals (12.123) into our expression for the momentum 
probability amplitude, Eq. (12.121/;); multiply the resulting (complex) quantity c(p, t) by its 
complex conjugate; and then multiply the result by dp. You should be able to see without 
going through the algebra that P(p,t) does depend on time. When c(p, t) is multiplied 
by c*(p,t), the resulting probability density contains “cross terms" that oscillate with time. 
This time-dependent momentum probability density contrasts strikingly with the momentum 
density for a stationary state, which quantity is independent of t. 

Question 12-22 

For the state (12.119), derive an expression for P{p,t) (in terms of (x/» | X«)> the 
natural frequency of the oscillator wo, the particle mass m, and fundamental constants) 
that explicitly displays the time dependence of this probability density. 


Question 12-23 

Do the mean momentum (p) and the uncertainty Ap for a non-stationary state depend 
on time? Why or why not? How does this behavior differ from that for a stationary 
state? 


The general expression (12.117) can be applied to any non-stationary state, so the 
arguments of Example 12.8 imply that the momentum probability density for such a state 
does depend on time. 

A final thought: In problem solving we get a lot of mileage by translating the 
TDSE into the energy representation. And you may have wondered if it is possible to 
translate the TDSE into the language of an arbitrary observable. Of course it is; the 

2u ln this evaluation, the parity of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions simplifies the algebra. The general 
form of the Fourier transform of a function /(.r) is y(k) = f(x)e ,k ' r dx. If /( x) has definite parity, 
this expression simplifies, i.e.. 


^<A'} = 


/(•»') coskxdr 
Jjj* /(.r) sin k\r dx 


/(. r) even 
/(.r) odd 


You can lind a gathering of Fourier Transforms in any good book of mathematical formulae and tables. A 
handy compendium (in an inexpensive book) is in § 1.17 of Formulas. Facts, and Constants for Students and 
Professionals in Engineering, Chemistry, and Physics by H. J. Fischbeck and K. H. Fischbcck (New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1982). (Of the multitude of books of tables I’ve accumulated, this is the cheapest and most 
useful.) 


Sec. 12.8 Momentum Redux: The Case of the Continuum Continued 579 



momentum representation is a common example. 30 But in practice such translations are 
rare because—as you learned in Question 12.9—the resulting equations for the projections 
of the state on eigenfunctions of an observable other than energy do not simplify as did 
the equations for the energy projections (§ 12.6). 

Nevertheless, the procedure of translating quantum-mechanical equations and prob¬ 
lems into various representations is a powerful one. First described in its full mathe¬ 
matical glory by P. A. M. Dirac (who in 1926 earned the first PhD ever awarded for 
research in quantum mechanics), this method has been codified using the mathematics 
of matrices, transformations, and linear algebra into the predominant problem-solving 
technique of quantum physics. 31 You will, I hope, have a chance to study it in your next 
quantum course. 


12.9 FINAL THOUGHTS: CONSTANTS OF THE MOTION 
RECONSIDERED 


You is feeling like 

you was lost in the bush, boy? 

You says: It is a puling sample jungle 
of woods. You most shouts out: 
Bethicket me for 
a stump of a beech 
if 1 have the poultriest notions 
what the farest he all means. 

Gee up, girly! 

— Finnegan's Wake 
by James Joyce 


In § 12.8 we discovered that the momentum probability density for a non-stationary state 
changes with time. Earlier in this chapter we ascertained that the energy probabilities 
for such a state do not depend on time. The obvious question raised by these findings 
is: Is energy the only observable whose probabilities (for an arbitrary state) are time- 
independent? The answer is no. As we’re about to prove, the probabilities for the energy 
and all other constants of the motion of a system are independent of time. Once again, 
the proof uses the method of eigenfunction expansion. 

First, a brief review. In Chap. 10 we defined a constant of the motion as an 
observable that is compatible with the energy. Such an observable is represented by an 
operator that commutes with H [Eq. (11.74)]. We then proved (§ 11.6) that a constant of 
the motion in quantum mechanics is conserved, i.e., its mean value in any state doesn’t 
depend on time: 

[7Y,Q]=0 => 4(<2)M = °- [any state #] (12.124) 


30 In Pbliu. 9.16 I asked you to consider the solution of this equation for a stationary state in the 
momentum representation. Similarly, in Pblm. 4.6 we solved for the momentum amplitude and density for the 
infinite square well. 

31 Dirac wrote what many consider to be the most elegant, clear presentation of this theory, in his 
landmark book Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1958), now in its fourth edition 
(and in paperback!). 


580 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



Now I want to generalize this result by proving that 




Proclamation 12.1 

All probabilistic and statistical quantities that refer to a constant of the motion of a system 
are independent of time. 


In light of (12.124), this claim certainly looks reasonable. The probability for obtaining 
a (discrete) eigenvalue q n in a measurement of Q is c { ,?\t). 32 These quantities appear 
in the expression for ( Q ), 

<<»« = £K 9, M|V (12.125) 

« 

(For simplicity, I’ve assumed that the spectrum of Q is purely discrete. Proclama¬ 
tion 12.1 and its proof generalize easily to constants of the motion with continuous and 
mixed spectra.) It is unlikely indeed that ( Q ) would be independent of time unless each 
probability |ci, Q) (£)| 2 were also independent of time. [If correct, this conclusion does 
not, of course, mean that ci, Q) (£) is itself independent of time.] But this plausibility 
argument doesn’t constitute a proof. 

Suppose, however, that we can prove that all individual probabilities are indepen¬ 
dent of time, 

J t P (l"< t )=J t I4 Q) W| 2 = 0 alln. (12.126) 

Then we can conclude that all expectation values ( f(Q )) are also independent of time, and 
therefore that the uncertainty, which depends only on ( Q) and (Q 2 ), is time independent. 
So let’s focus our attention on Eq. (12.126). 

Argument: The obvious way to proceed, I suppose, is to try to derive an equation 
for the time dependence of c\?\t)— an equation analogous to (12.88) for the energy 
amplitudes c„ E \t) —in the hopes that when we multiply cj,^(£) by its complex conjugate 
in (12.126), the time dependence will just go away. At first, this road seems to lead to 
a dead end. 33 

To explore the problem, we start with the expansion of ty(x, t ) in the complete set 
°f eigenfunctions of Q, 


*(*.0 = 


(12.127) 


Substituting this expansion into the TDSE for Eq. (12.79), we get 

__ 


(12.128) 


32 In this section we’ll use projections of a slate on eigenfunctions of ft and on eigenfunctions of Q. 
To keep straight these two types of projections. I’ll use a superscript to indicate the observable in which the 
wave function was expanded. 

33 We shall follow here very closely the derivation of (12.88). The present derivation will be much 
easier to follow if you’ll take a minute to refresh your memory about the earlier one. 


Sec. 12.9 Final Thoughts: Constants of the Motion Reconsidered 581 




which is very similar to Eq. (12.84 a). But we cannot now proceed with the rest of this 
derivation as we did in getting to Eq. (12,88),for the functions are not eigenfunctions 

of a. 

We must leave H where it sits in (12.128). Its lurking presence means, as we 
shall see, that the equation for the n th projection ci, Q) (f) is not independent of the 
other projections. To derive this equation, we invoke orthogonality of the eigenfunctions 
{xi^} of I* 16 Hermitian operator Q , 



(12.129) 


Multiplying Eq. (12.128) from the left by xS, Q) *(z) and integrating the result over all 
space, we obtain an equation for each cS, Q) (f): 



V (Q)* 

An 


(x)Hx { w\x) dx = ih—c^\t). 


(12.130) 


These equations look a bit like (12.86/;), with one crucial difference. The equations 
(12.130) for the various ci, Q) (f) are coupled to one another [Notice that I used orthonor¬ 
mality of the eigenfunctions of the (Hermitian) operator Q to eliminate the sum over n' 
on the right-hand side. The trouble is, we can’t pull the same trick on the left-hand side 
to make Eq. (12.129) look like (12.86c).] To solve the equation for, say, c[ Q) (t), you 
must know all the other projections c\®\t),n ^ 1, because they appear on the left-hand 
side. But to solve the equation for, say, c { 2 Q) [t ), you must know c[ Q) (t), for it appears 
on the left-hand side of that equation. The dead end I mentioned above looks like a 
cul-de-sac. Oh well. You can’t win ’em all. 

But wait! We have not used all we know about Q. So far we’ve been treating this 
little guy like an arbitrary operator; but Q is not arbitrary at all. The operator Q represents 
a constant of the motion and therefore commutes with H. To see the consequences of this 
fact, let’s clarify the structure of (12.130) by introducing Dirac notation for the integral: 


I w I x!?’> = *£<&*>(*)■ (,2131) 


Now, look very carefully at the matrix element in (12.131). It is the matrix el¬ 
ement of an operator (H) with respect to eigenfunctions of a second operator (Q) that 
commutes with the first. Do you recall the handy theorem we proved in § 11.3? Accord¬ 
ing to Proclamation 11.3, such a matrix element is zero if the eigenvalues of the two 
eigenfunctions are different, i.e.. 


[W,Q]=0 =*• (xi, Q) I ft |xl?’) = 0 'f»'/»' (12.132) 


So things aren’t as bad as they seemed: only one of the matrix elements on the 
left-hand side of the equation for each c5, Q) (<) is non-zero. The sum goes away. We are 
left with (uncoupled) equations for each projection, 




n 


X< Q) >c: 


,(Q) 


w- 


(12.133) 


582 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



The mathematical structure of this equation is identical to that of (12.87). Its solution is 

cjp)(t) = cj, Q) (0) e“ , <*" Q) l^lx ( n Q) >*/ ft . (12.134) 

The rather complicated matrix element in the exponential factor in (12.134) causes 
no difficulty, for when we multiply ci t Q) (*) by its complex conjugate, the offending 
exponential goes away. We are left with 



(12.135) 


which handily proves (12.126) and Proclamation 12.1. 

Q. E. D. 

Our results here and in Chap. 11 concerning constants of the motion reveal that in 
quantum physics, as in classical mechanics, there is about these observables a kind of 
stasis. But their constancy takes on a special form in quantum physics, a form dictated 
by the special, restricted nature of accessible knowledge about a microscopic system. 


EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 

Unearned knowledge is perilous. 

Only by the seeking 

and gaining of it 

may its uses be understood, 

its true worth measured. 

—Pitchwife 

in White Gold Wielder 
by Stephen Donaldson 


The problems for this chapter focus primarily on its contents. But because this chapter 
is, secondarily, a “wrap up” of the whole book, I have included some exercises that draw 
on earlier material. 

Exercises 

12.1 States of the Simple Harmonic Oscillator—Stationary and Otherwise 

All questions in this exercise concern a one-dimensional simple harmonic oscillator with 
natural frequency uo. Those of Part A pertain to the basic quantum physics of a one¬ 
dimensional conservative system, those of Part B to the physical properties of the oscillator, 
those of Part C to its stationary and non-stationary states, and those of Part D to measurements. 

Part A: 

[a] Write down the time-dependent Schrodinger equation for this system, including the 
explicit expression for the Hamiltonian. 

[b] Using the mathematical lechn\qutofseparationof\wiables^deTi\e an expression foT 
the wave function 4>(a;, t) of a stationary state of the SHO, showing explicitly the time- 
dependence of this function. Also derive the equation for the Hamiltonian eigenfunction 
ipn(x). (Do not, however, solve the TISE.) 

[c] Prove that the Hamiltonian you wrote down in part [a] is Hemiitian. (You do not have to 
go back to first principles to do this; />., you can use the fact that x and p are Hermitian. 
But justify each step in your argument.) 


Exercises and Problems 583 



[d] From the Hermiticity of the Hamiltonian, there follow several important quantum- 
mechanical properties. For each of the following items, state the appropriate property: 

(1) the expectation value of the energy, ( E)\ 

(2) the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian, E „; 

(3) the set of Hamiltonian eigenfunctions, {ipn(x)}\ 

(4) the “overlap integral” of two Hamiltonian eigenfunctions, (ip n (x) | ^ m (®)>, where 
n/m. 

Part B: 

[a] For each pair of observables listed below, answer each of the following questions: 

(1) are the observables compatible? 

(2) is it possible in principle to measure the two observables simultaneously to infinite 
precision? 

(3) does there exist a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions of the operators that 
represent these observables? 

(4) is the product of the uncertainties of the two observables in each pair, when evaluated 
for an arbitrary state, necessarily positive? 

1. energy and parity; 

2. energy and position; 

3. parity and momentum; 

4. position and momentum 

[b] From this list, pick one pair that does have a complete set of simultaneous eigenfunctions 
and write down the form of these eigenfunctions. 

[c] Is the parity of this system conserved? Why or why not? 

Part C: 

In this part we shall consider two states of the SHO. The initial conditions that define these 
states are represented by the following (normalized) wave functions: 

$(z,0) = -J= [2ipo(x) + 3^i (a)], (12.1.1) 

where V’n (®) are Hamiltonian eigenfunctions of the SHO, and 

$'(*,0) = -L (ty* (2/JV - 1) e-'* 2 * 2 ' 2 . (12.1.2) 

For each of these states, answer each of the following questions: 

[a] Is either of these states stationary? If so, which one(s)? 

[b] Write down the wave functions 'l'(x.f) and tf'(s,t) that represent the states at times 
t > 0 that evolve from these initial states. 

[c] At t = 0 the parity of each state is measured. What value (or values) will be obtained in 
the measurements, and with what probabilities? Is the parity of either state sharp? Why 
or why not? 

[d] Evaluate the expectation value of the parity of each state. What is the physical signifi¬ 
cance of these quantities? 

[e] Now, suppose that at t = 0 we measure the energy of each of these states instead of 
the parity. Evaluate the probability that a member of the ensemble will exhibit each 
of the following values. Do this for the state represented by ^(x,*) and for the state 
represented by $'(x,t). In each case, fully justify your answer to each question. 


584 


Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



1 . E = 0 

2. E = \hu o 

3. E = -^hojo 

4. E = hw o 

[f] Calculate the average value and the uncertainty of the energy of the SHO that would 
be obtained in this measurement. 

[g] Are ( E ) and A E independent of time for these states? 


Part D: 

For the following questions, assume that the SHO is initially in its ground state. 

[a] Is this state a momentum eigenstate? Prove your answer. 

lb) At time t = 10 sec we measure the momentum of the particle. Write down an expression 
for the probability that we will obtain in this measurement a value between hk 0 and 
hko + dk. (You do not have to fully evaluate your expression, but write it completely 
enough that the only thing left to do is to evaluate an integral.) 

[c] How would your answer to question [b] differ if the momentum measurement were earned 
out at t = 40 sec instead of at t = 10 sec? Justify your answer. 

12.2 The Physics of a Non-Stationary State 

Consider a one-dimensional simple harmonic oscillator with natural frequency uq that is 
initially in a quantum state represented by the unnormalized wave function 

#( x , 0) = [2^o (x) + 4i/>i (x ) - 3i/> 3 (a;)], (12.2.1) 

where, of course, the functions ^»„(a;)’s are the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions for this system. 

[a] Write down the solution to the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation subject to this 
initial condition, i.e., the wave function V(x t t) that represents the state for times t > 0. 

[b] Is this state an energy eigenstate? Why or why not? 

[c] Evaluate the mean energy for this state. 

[d] In a measurement of the energy of this system at some time t > 0, determine the 
probability of obtaining each of the following values: 

(1) o; 

( 2 ) 

(3) 8hu;o. 

[e] Is parity a constant of the motion for this system? Why or why not? 

[f] Is this state an eigenstate of parity? Prove your answer. 

[g] Evaluate the average momentum at t = 0. 

[h] Do simultaneous eigenstates of parity and energy exist for this system? If so, tell why 
and give an example. If not, tell why not. 


Problems 


12.1 Energy Measurements on a Non-Stationary State 

Suppose a particle in the well of Fig. 12.4 is in a state represented by the function 


K QM) =-1 = [4^i(»)e- |El1 ^ 

-2+ 304(x)e- iE <"' i ]. 


(12X1) 


In an energy measurement at time t, what value is most likely to be obtained? ... least likely 
to be obtained? What are the probabilities of a member system exhibiting each of these 
values? To describe the aggregate of results of the measurement, evaluate the expectation 
value and the uncertainty at time t. 


Exercises and Problems 585 



12.2 Average Values for Non-Stationary States 

Suppose we have in hand the energy probability amplitudes c„(0) for a state ^ of a one¬ 
dimensional quantum system. Suppose the energy spectrum of the system is discrete, with 
eigenvalues E n} n = 1,2,... and eigenfunctions A measurement at time t > 0 is 

performed on an observable Q (not the energy). Derive the following expression for the mean 
value of Q obtained in this state: 

(Q)(t) c «'(°M0)(Vv I Q I V>n)cos (£,,/ h En) ~ 

n n'>n (12.2.1) 

+Y1 l C »(°)| 2 (^> \q\*«y 


12.3 Return of the Amazing Expanding Square Well 

At t = 0 an infinite square well suddenly expands, its width changing from L to 2L. Before 

expansion, the microscopic particle in the well was contentedly minding its own business in 

the ground stationary state, with energy e [ L) . At t = 10 sec, the particle’s energy is measured. 

[a] What is the most probable value obtained in the measurement? Calculate the probability 
of a member system exhibiting this value. 

[b] What is the probability that a member will exhibit the value n 2 h 2 /{2mL 2 )l Discuss 
briefly the implications of your answer for the state of the system after expansion. 

[c] What is the probability that a member will exhibit a value greater than 8n 2 h 2 /{2mL )? 

[d] What is the ensemble average obtained in the measurement? 

[e] How does P(Ef L) ) depend on j in the limit j -> oo? What does your answer imply 
about the energy uncertainty for this state? 

12.4 Son of the Amazing Expanding Square Well 

Consider again the expanding square well of Pblm. 12.3. Suppose the initial state of the 

particle before expansion is a non-stationary state of the well of width L, i.e.. 


^(.r,0) 


1 

yio 


3V’! t, (x)+v4 w (*)] 


(12.4.1) 


[a] Let’s first analyze the state at t = 0 before expansion. 

(1) Were we to measure the energy of this state, what values would we find, and with 
what probabilities? 

(2) In such a measurement, what value would we get for the average energy? 

(3) What value would we get for the energy uncertainty? 

[b] Now the well expands, its width changing from L to 2 L. At t > 0 we measure the 
energy of the particle in the expanded well. 

(1) Thought Question: Is the wave function at f > 0 

¥<*,t) l --L [3(12.4.2a) 
If so, tell why and go to part [b (2)]. If not, is the wave function 




1 

v/IO 



+ ip£ L) {x)e 


-iB {2L) t/h 


(12.4.2/?) 


If so. explain wh y. If not, tell why not. 

(2) In the measurement at t = 10 sec, what values of the energy are allowed? Derive 
an expression for their probabilities. 

(3) Of the first ten eigenvalues E^ 2 ^, what values are allowed but do not appear in the 
measurement for this state? Why do these values not appear? 

(4) What is the most probable value for this state? What is its probability? 

(5) Calculate the mean value of the results obtained in the energy measurement. 


586 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



(6) Calculate the energy uncertainty for this state. 

Hint: The uncertainty for this state is not infinite. To help you find out what it is, 
here’s a handy series you may not know about: 

§ = (I2A3) 

[c] What property of the non-stationary state (12.4.1) causes the uncertainty A E after ex¬ 
pansion of the well to be finite? Would a finite uncertainty follow for any non-stationary 
state? Why, or why not? 

12.5 The Incredible Sloshing Oscillator—Explained! 

In § 9.10 we investigated the behavior of a non-stationary state of a particle in a simple 
harmonic oscillator potential V(x) = mwlx 2 /2, i.e., a wave packet [see Example 9.6]. We 
found that such a packet exhibits periodic behavior , sloshing back and forth, as illustrated in 
Fig. 9.20. In the discussion of Example 9.6, I remarked on the eigenfunction expansion of a 
non-stationary state wave function [Eq. (9.137)], and now I want to illuminate that discussion 
with what we have learned in this chapter. 

Consider, then, an arbitrary wave packet V(x,t) of a SHO with natural frequency w 0 . 

[a] Write down the expansion of this function in eigenfunctions of the SHO Hamiltonian. 
Show in your expansion the explicit time dependence of the projections c„ (<). 

[b] The classical period of such an oscillator is T = 2n/u) 0 . Based on the expansion of part 
[a], figure out the wave function at this time, ^(x,T). How is this function related to 
^(x,0)? How are the position probability densities at the two times related? 

[c] Discuss the relationship of the properties of all observables in this state at t = T — 
energy, position, momentum, etc—to these observables in the state at t = 0. Discuss 
how the probabilistic and statistical properties of all observables vary with time. 

[d] The classical limit of the simple harmonic oscillator is n —> oo, the limit in which 
the spacing between adjacent (quantized) energies becomes very small compared to the 
values of those energies (§ 9.8). Use the Correspondence Principle to explain how your 
answers to part [c] go over m this limit smoothly to the classical description of the 
time-dependence of observables for a macroscopic oscillator, such as a pendulum. 

12.6 Inducing Non-Stationary State Behavior 

In the extended example of § 12.6 we saw one way to coerce a system into a non-stationary 
state: make a sudden change in some parameter of the system, thereby changing its potential. 
In that example, we altered the size of an infinite square well that enclosed a microscopic 
particle. Here we’ll consider an alternate way to create a non-stationary state, working with 
our other omnipresent example: the simple harmonic oscillator. 

Suppose the potential energy of the oscillator is 

V(x) = ^mul{x-x 0 ) 2 . (12.6.1) 

This potential differs from that of a conventional oscillator (Chap. 9) in that its midpoint is 
at xo rather than at x = 0. 

Suppose further that the initial state of the particle with this potential is the ground 
stationary state, with energy E = hujof 2. 

Now, imagine that a suddeTfchange inlhe system is effected at t — 0 so that the center 
of the oscillator is shifted from a?o to x = 0. We shall suppose the change to be so sudden 
that, to a good approximation, we can consider it instantaneous. The Hamiltonian of the 
system after the change is the familiar one 

H = T+ ynulx 2 . (12.6.2) 


Exercises and Problems 587 



Let’s explore the consequences of this sudden change on the state of the system. 

[a] Write down an explicit expression for the initial wave function before the change. 

[b] Suppose we measure the energy at some t > 0. Determine the probability that we will 
obtain each of the following values: 

( 1 ) i/uuo; 

(2) f/kuo; 

(3) a value greater than \huj 0 . 

[c] Write down the wave function <H(x,t) for t > 0. (You need not evaluate the general 
expansion coefficient in your expression, but explain how you would do so if you had 
to.) 

12.7 In Search of State Functions 

As noted in § 12.6, in applying quantum mechanics we must often construct the wave function 
that represents a quantum state from bits and pieces of information gleaned from various 
experiments. Usually it is not possible to infer from experimental data all the details of 
the state function, but, given sufficient experimental data, we can often determine enough 
about the function to use it in predictive calculations. We considered an instance of this in 
Example 12.6. Here is another. 

Consider a particle of mass m in an infinite square well with “walls” at x = -L/2 and 
x — L/2. In our first of two experiments, we perform an ensemble measurement at some 
time t of the energy of the particle. We find that the members of the ensemble exhibit only 
the values E\ and E 2 , and that the average value of energy is 


(E) ( t) = 


3tt 2 H 2 
2 m L 2 


(12.7.1) 


[a] Write down an explicit expression for the most general wave function ty(x,t) that is 
consistent with this information. (Be careful in how you deal with the phase of each 
term in your function.) 

[b] In our second experiment, we measure the position of the same particle, ensuring that 
it is in the same state as before we measured the energy. In the position measurement, 
we learn that at t = 0 the particle is more likely to be found in the right half of the box 
(i.e., at some value of x between 0 and L/2) than in the left half. Use this additional 
information to refine your wave function from part [a], i.e., come up with a wave function 
that is consistent with the results of both the energy and the position measurements. Is 
your wave function now completely specified, or do you need more experimental data 
to fully determine it? 

Remark: The curious caveat in the first sentence of part [b] is necessary because the energy 
measurement will change the state of the system, and I don’t want you to worry about this 
effect yet. Were we actually going to measure two observables, such as position and energy, 
in the laboratory we could proceed as follows: Sub-divide the initial ensemble into two 
identical sub-ensembles and perform the energy measurement on one sub-ensemble and the 
position measurement on the other. This ensures that the energy measurement will not alter 
the position characteristics of the state and vice versa. We’ll look at the remarkable effects 
of measurement on a quantum state in Chap. 13. 

12.8 A Tricky Question 

Derive the momentum uncertainty (Ap)„ for an arbitrary stationary state of a particle of mass 
m in an infinite square wellj)f widt h L. 


588 Chap. 12 Eigenfunction Expansions 



CHAPTER 13 

Altered States 

The Great Measurement Mystery 


13.1 The Role of Measurement in Quantum Physics 

13.2 The Effect of a Measurement on a State Function 

13.3 The Evolution of a State After Collapse 

*13.4 Multiple Measurements of Compatible Observables I 
*13.5 Multiple Measurements II: An Example 
*13.6 Dueling Observables: Multiple Measurements 
of Incompatible Observables 
13.7 Final Thoughts: Mysteries Abound 



“Careful, Dorothy,” 
he cautioned her. 

“Nothing that actually happens 
is or can be preposterous.” 

—from Skylark of Valeron 
by E. E. “Doc” Smith 

We now confront a major mystery: what happens to the state of a system when we measure 
an observable ? So far, we have avoided this question, learning instead how to describe 
the evolution of a quantum state in isolation , i.e., in the absence of measurement. We 
know how to follow the development of a state from its initial condition to the time of 
a measurement and how to predict the probabilities for the various results that might be 
obtained in the measurement. But until now we haven’t faced the question: what is the 
state of the system after the measurement? 

The answer, although strictly part of the formalism of quantum mechanics, is not 
to be found in the Schrodinger equation. As we shall see (§ 13.2), a measurement of 
an observable causes the state to change in a way that is inherently uncontrollable and 
unpredictable, via a mechanism the nature of which we do not know. That such a change 
takes place is not at issue; as the distinguished mathematician John von Neumann (1903- 
1957) showed in 1932, this phenomenon is built into quantum theory. 1 What is at issue 
is why and how the state function changes. This conundrum is called the problem of 
measurement. In a recent review of this problem, 2 John G. Cramer remarked that the 
problem of measurement “remains the most puzzling and counterintuitive aspect of the 
interpretation of quantum mechanics.” 

Why, in an introduction to quantum mechanics, should we worry about the problem 
of measurement? For one thing, physics is the science of measurement. Our understand¬ 
ing of the physical universe in its macroscopic and microscopic realms ultimately rests 
on experiments, on measurements. Indeed, physicists believe in quantum theory because 
it continues to be verified in a huge number of experiments on a variety of systems 
under a range of physical conditions. But to understand the behavior of the microworld, 
as manifested in these experiments, we must understand the effect on an ensemble of 
human observation. This effect is the subject of this chapter. 

Were we studying classical physics, we could ignore the experimental dimension of 
our subject (although it would be unwise to do so), because in principle, an experiment 
on a macroscopic system does not alter its state; i.e., a measurement can leave unchanged 
all physical properties of a classical system. But that’s not true for a microscopic system. 
Moreover, investigating a system whose states are represented by wave functions is quite 
different from studying one whose states are described by trajectories. 

The reason for this difference is that, unlike a trajectory, a state function has 
no real physical existence. Rather, this function is the mathematical embodiment of 
accessible knowledge about the state it represents. Only in the laboratory can we seek 
such information about the wave function as nature allows. (In Example 12.6, for 
instance, -we used data from an energy measurement to deduce information about the 
state function of an ensemble of CO molecules.) But when we perform measurements, 

1 Von Neumann’s trail-blazing work Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton, N. J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1955) does not make for easy reading, but I nonetheless recommend its early 
chapters to readers who are determined to understand in depth the problem of measurement. 

2 Rev. Mod. Phys., 58, 647 (1986). 


590 Chap. 13 Altered States 



the state function changes as a consequence. 3 So to plan and execute experiments and 
to apprehend their results, we must understand their effect on the state of the system on 
which they are performed. 

If two or more observables are measured, the problem of measurement becomes 
a problem of “knowability” (§ 13.3). If the observables are incompatible, then their 
uncertainties satisfy an inequality—the Generalized Uncertainty Principle (§ 11.4)—that 
may prohibit our knowing their precise, simultaneous values. We shall examine the 
measurement of two incompatible observables in § 13.4 and, as a happy by-product 
of our inquiry into the effects of measurement on a state, will gain insight into how 
uncertainty works, a rare glimpse into the innermost secrets of the microcosm. 


13.1 THE ROLE OF MEASUREMENT IN QUANTUM PHYSICS 

When you cannot measure it, 

when you cannot express it in numbers, 

your knowledge of it 

is of a meagre and unsatisfactory kind. 

—Lord Kelvin (1824-1907) 

Anyone who has worked in a laboratory knows the pragmatic definition of a measure¬ 
ment: a measurement is the experimental determination of information about the physical 
properties of a system. In this chapter I want to focus on the conceptual definition of a 
measurement, and to this end will consider only “idealized measurements”—idealized in 
a sense that will become clear as we proceed. 

Our first step towards idealizing the process of measurement is to assume that 
a measurement can be performed instantaneously. 4 Accordingly, we will speak of a 
“measurement time.” I’ll denote the measurement time for an unspecified observable (or 
observables) by t m and for a specific observable Q by tq. 

Limitations on Measurement 

Both nature and human fallibility limit the accuracy of experiments. The latter source of 
uncertainty is the most familiar. Experimental error and the inadequacies of man-made 
apparatus limit the precision of measured data. For example, in the energy-loss spectrum 
for electron-F 2 scattering in Fig. 12.3a each peak has a width which results from the 
inability of the source and detector to determine precisely the energy of a microscopic 
particle. Similar experimental uncertainties plague physicists, regardless of the size of 
the systems they study. 

More insidious (though less a problem in practice) are quantum uncertainties , which 
arise from the intrinsic “unknowability” of precise information about microscopic sys¬ 
tems, as codified in the Generalized Uncertainty Principle of Chap. 11. Uncertainty may 
arise in a measurement of a single observable if the state being investigated happens not 

3 Like other statements in these introductory remarks, this is true in general. If, however, the state 
before measurement happens to be an eigenstate of the observable being measured, then the state function is 
unchanged by the measurement. (See § 13.2.) 

^Like practically every aspect of measurement theory, defining the time at which an experiment is 
performed is a subtle business. For a provocative discussion of this question see “When is a Quantum 
Measurement” by Asher Peres, Amer. Jour. Phys., 54, 688 (1986). 


Sec. 13.1 The Role of Measurement in Quantum Physics 591 



to be an eigenstate of that observable. 5 Or it may arise (in a more complicated way) in 
attempts to measure simultaneously two (or more) observables. We know from § 11.4 
that if observables Q and R are incompatible, then for any state their uncertainties obey 
the inequality [the Generalized Uncertainty Principle (11.55)] 

AQAR> ^ |(i[Q,«])| • (13-1) 

Whether or not this principle actually limits the “knowability” of precise information 
about Q and R depends on the state—more precisely, on whether the expectation value 
on the right-hand side of (13.1) is zero (c./., Table 11.4). If not, then we cannot simul¬ 
taneously measure Q and R to infinite precision. 

In the introduction to this chapter, I noted the role of measurement as an exploratory 
tool for probing the nature of a state function, which is itself inaccessible. Measurement 
also plays a part in the predictive function of physics. A primary objective of an ex¬ 
periment is to determine sufficient information about the state of a system at one time 
to enable prediction of the system’s subsequent behavior. That is, we’d like to measure 
enough observables at t m to be able to predict the evolution of the system for t > t m . 

But in quantum mechanics, such predictions are impossible unless we know what 
the measurement does to the state function. For, unlike classical physicists, quantum 
physicists must live with the unavoidable observer-observed interaction I first men¬ 
tioned in Chap. I: 6 


Rule 

It is impossible to perform a measurement on a microscopic system that does not disturb 
the system in a significant, unpredictable, and uncontrollable way. 


Concerning this remarkable feature of quantum mechanics, John Von Neumann said: 7 

... in the atom we are at the boundary of the physical world, where each measurement 
is an interference of the same order of magnitude as the object measured and therefore 
affects it basically. 

Now there’s a sobering thought. 

The Meaning of “Measurement” (A Review) 

In Chap. 3 (§ 3.4) we thoroughly examined the conceptual definition of a measurement 
on a microscopic system. This topic is so crucial to our present concerns that I want 
to take a moment to review it. Central to the interpretation of quantum mechanics is 

5 Recall (Chap. 10) that a system in an eigenstate of Q has a value of this observable—namely, the 
eigenvalue obtained when Q acts on the state function, as Q^(®, f) = 9 ^(x, t). So for such a state A Q = 0, 
and the onl y limits to precision are experimental uncertainties. 

6 Among other disquieting implications, this rule prohibits us from inferring from measurements at f„, 
the nature of the state for t < t m . In general, the most we can hope to determine uniquely is the state at the 
instant before we made the measurement. See § 7.1 of Introduction to Quantum Mechanics by R. H. Dicke 
and D. Wittke (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1960). 

7 Quoted in The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics by M. Jammer (New York: Wiley, 1974), p. 266. 
This fascinating volume contains lengthy historical and philosophical discussions concerning the problem of 
measurement. 


592 Chap. 13 Altered States 




the concept of an ensemble of microscopic systems. Recall (Fig. 3.5) that an ensemble 
is a collection of a huge number of identical, non-interacting systems in the same quan¬ 
tum state. Individual systems in the ensemble are called members. And according to 
Postulate I, any state of the ensemble can be represented by a state function \P. 8 

When we speak of “a measurement at of Q ” we mean simultaneous measure¬ 
ments of the observable Q on all members of the ensemble. 9 I will use the symbol 
Mq[£q] as shorthand for such a measurement. 

And Then a Miracle Occurs 

It is surprisingly easy to see that an experiment must change the state of the system. 
Imagine a measurement of an observable Q. Suppose the experimental set-up is such 
that the state before measurement is not an eigenstate of Q — i.e ., that the uncertainty 
A Q is positive. In terms of an ensemble, this condition means that at the instant before 
Mq[£q] the members of the ensemble do not have a value of Q\ rather, their state allows 
for several possible values of Q , any one of which may appear in the measurement. 
These values, we now know, are among the eigenvalues of Q. 

Now, think about what happens to the ensemble when we measure Q : each member 
exhibits one or another of the eigenvalues of Q. After Mq[<q], each member has a value 
of Q—the value it exhibited in the measurement—and so is in an eigenstate of Q. 10 

So after the measurement each member is in a state in which Q is sharp. But not 
all members are in the same state: some exhibited one value of Q in Mq[£q], others 
exhibited a different value. Clearly, the measurement changed the nature of the ensemble- 
in fact, what was an ensemble is no longer an ensemble, for the various members are in 
different quantum states. The measurement changed the state! It is this marvel that we 
will now look at in detail. 

13.2 THE EFFECT OF A MEASUREMENT ON A STATE FUNCTION 

I don’t know, 
we may be into 

some kind of quantum thing here, 
or some exotic relativistic physics, 
in which consciousness snapped me into 
some new sharp state. 

My physics is lousy. 

—Dr. Edward Jessup 

in Altered States (A Novel) 
by Paddy Chayefsky 


8 In this book we consider only ensembles that can be represented by a state function; such ensembles 
are said to be in pure states. Someday you may encounter a mixed state of an ensemble, a state in which the 
available information is insufficient to specify a state function. Such an ensemble must be described by more 
arcane mathematical beasts called density matrices. 

9 Some physicists prefer to think of a measurement as a huge number of successive measurements on 
a single system. This is OK provided one remembers that ilie state of the system prior to each measurement 
must he the same. I find this definition confusing and so won’t use it in this book. 

10 We are in treacherous semantic waters. Even the word “after” has to be carefully defined. By 
“after” I mean an infinitesimal time after — i.e., at <q + 6t. The reason for this qualification is that once 
the measurement is over, the members of the ensemble continue to evolve according to the time-dependent 
Schrodinger Equation. This subsequent time development may further change the state, in ways we have 
discussed in Chaps. 6 and 12. But at the moment we are not concerned with this evolution. (See § 13.2) 


Sec. 13.2 The Effect of a Measurement on a State Function 593 



At the end of the previous section, we deduced that measuring an observable Q on an 
ensemble changes the state of the members so that afterward, each is in an eigenstate 
of Q. Which eigenstate a member winds up in depends on which eigenvalue of Q it 
exhibited in the measurement. In fact, what is left after the measurement is not a single 
ensemble, but rather several sub-ensembles. Each sub-ensemble consists of all members 
of the original ensemble that exhibited the same eigenvalue ofQ in Mq[£q]. So each sub¬ 
ensemble is a collection of (identical, non-interacting) member systems each of which 
is in a particular eigenstate. That is, each sub-ensemble is itself an ensemble. Here is a 
handy summary of this argument: 


MEASUREMENT OF Q AT TIME t Q : 


Before 

After 

Q is uncertain: AQ > 0 

-» Q is sharp: AQ = 0 

ensemble is not in an eigenstate of Q 

each sub-ensemble is in an eigenstate of Q 


Clearly, the measurement wreaks a dramatic change on the ensemble on which it is 
performed. 

In this section and the next I want to illustrate the effects of measurement by 
reexamining a familiar experiment and a couple of familiar examples. 

Another Look at the Single-Slit Experiment 

In Chap. 2 we considered the determination of the position of electrons in the double-slit 
experiment (§ 2.5). In this classic demonstration, the electrons seem to behave like waves 
in their propagation through space and like particles in their conduct at the detector. 

The dual nature of sub-atomic particles is also evident in the single-slit experi¬ 
ment sketched in Fig. 13.1. The source emits a beam of (non-interacting, nearly mono- 
energetic) electrons; this beam is our ensemble. The electrons in the beam propagate 
through the apparatus until they reach the detector, where they form spots. Of course, we 
now know that the state of the electrons in the beam is represented by a wave function, 
the squared modulus of which is their position probability density. In this figure, I have 
sketched this density at various times during the journey from source to detector. 

The question I want to pose now is: what is the significance of the appearance of 
spots on the detector ? That is, what do these events imply about the state of the electrons 
after measurement? To find out, let’s consider the wave function as the electrons travel 
to the detector. 

Drawing on our knowledge of wave packets (Chaps. 4 and 6), we can explain 
the behavior of the electrons. They emerge from the source in a state represented by 
a free-particle wave packet —a state in which the position uncertainty Ax is positive. 
As time passes, this packet propagates, according to the time-dependent Schrodinger 
—Equation with F ^ 0, to the diaphragm. Passage through the slit changes the state 
of the electrons, which emerge in a state represented by a different wave packet (see 
Fig. 13.1). But until they arrive at the detector, the electrons do not have a position 
( i.e ., after traversing the slit, the position uncertainty Ax is still positive). This state is 
characterized by several possible positions , as is evident in the probability densities in 
Fig. 13.1. 


594 Chap. 13 Altered States 




Slit 


Detector 


P{x, t) 


P(x, t) 


P(x, t) 





x 


Figure 13.1 The single-slit diffraction experiment. The position probability densities P(x,t) = 
t )| 2 shown below the apparatus are crude representations only —that is, they are supposed to 
suggest changes that occur in P(x, t) as the electrons saunter from the source to the detector, not to 
represent accurately this density function. Note that the last probability density, which corresponds 
to the state that represents (the sub-ensemble of) electrons that exhibited a spot at xo, is not a 
consequence of evolution a la the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation. 


At some time t x , an electron arrives at the detector, a phosphor that measures 
position. It is here that we see evidence of particle-like behavior, for on the detector, 
spots form. 11 This means that at t x the state function changed, for at this time each 
electron suddenly “acquired” a definite position—the value x 0 at which the spot appears 
(see Fig. 13.1). Evidently the measurement “ actualized ” one of the multitude of possible 
positions that were implicit in the wave function before measurement. That is, M ;C [< a .] 
altered the state of the ensemble, transforming the wave function from one for which 
Ax > 0 to ones for which Ax = 0. (Position is sharp only at the instant after measure¬ 
ment. Afterward, the states of the electrons evolve, according to the TDSE, into ones 
for which Ax is positive.) 

In this discussion we have identified the two radically different ways that a quantum 
state can change: 

1. In the absence of measurement (no interaction with an observer), a state undergoes 
“natural Schrodinger evolution,” changing with time according to the TDSE. 

—2—When-an-observable-is-measured, the-state-undergoes an—induced-mutation^a 
change that is not described by the TDSE. 

11 What we actually see in the laboratory are photons emitted when molecules in the phosphor decay 
out of the state into which they were excited by the electrons. As discussed in Chap. 2, the distribution of these 
photons and the physics of the interaction of the electron with the molecules of the phosphor are analogous to 
the classical behavior of particles, not waves. 


Sec. 13.2 The Effect of a Measurement on a State Function 595 





Energy Measurements and Their Effects 


As I noted in § 13.1, to understand these “induced mutations,” it is crucial that we fully 
understand the change in the ensemble to which the electrons belong. To clarify this 
aspect of measurement theory, let’s return to an example from § 12.4, one that concerns 
an energy measurement. 


Example 13.1. Converting a Non-Stationary State into a Stationary State 

In Example 12.5 we analyzed a non-stationary state of a particle in a one-dimensional infinite 
square well of width L. There we sought to predict the outcome of an energy measurement 
at t = 0 for a state that prior to the measurement was represented by the wave function 
(with x = 0 at the left wall) 


^(a;,0) 




(13.3) 


To this end, we “translated” this wave function into the energy representation , obtaining the 
energy probability amplitudes 12 


c< £) ( 0) = 


0 

1 8y/l5 
n 3 7r 3 


n = 2,4,6,... 
7i—l, 3,5,... 


(13.4) 


The square modulus of ci, c) (0) is the probability that a member of an ensemble of systems 
in this state will exhibit the eigenvalue E n = 7i 2 7r 2 ft‘ 2 /(2mL 2 ) in the measurement. We 
evaluated some of these probabilities in Eq. (12.48)—finding for example that P{E\) = 
0.9986 and P(E 3 ) = 0.0014. 

To understand the implications of these findings, consider an ensemble of 10,000 
particle-in-a-box systems initially in the state (13.3). In an average measurement, 9986 of 
the members would yield the ground-state energy E\, while 14 would yield the energy of 
the second excited state, E 3 . [We might obtain one of the higher excited-state energies, 
because any member could exhibit any E n (for odd n). But P(E n ) for n > 3 is so small 
that a larger ensemble would be required for even one member to have a fighting chance of 
showing one of these values.] 

But the measurement also “forces” each member into the energy eigenstate corre¬ 
sponding to the value it exhibited. So the number |c„(0)| 2 is also the probability that 
immediately after = 0] the system will be in the n th stationary state. 

We could verify this prediction by measuring the energy a second time, as in Fig. 13.2. 
Suppose that in this additional experiment, we measure the energy of the sub-ensemble of 
systems that exhibited E\ in the first energy measurement. This sub-ensemble is in an energy 
eigenstate, so in the second measurement all its member systems would exhibit the value Ei. 

It’s easy to write down the wave function that represents the state of each sub¬ 
ensemble immediately after the first energy measurement. This measurement altered the 
wave function of those member systems that exhibited E\ from ty(x,0) of Eq. (13.3) to 
that of the ground stationary state: 4^i(a;,0) = ^i(x). Similarly, it changed the wave 
function of those systems that exhibited E 3 from ^(x, 0) to ^(x, 0) = ip 3 {x). 

The nature of the change of state in this example is clear: the initial wave function 
-*(x, 0) represented a state-with an uncertain energy, /.e., one in which the particle has no 
energy. The (first) energy measurement “actualized” one of the possible energies inherent in 
this wave function, thereby transforming the non-stationary state into one of two stationary 
states. 


12 In this chapter I will label projections of a state function with its expansion observable whenever 
doing so might avoid confusion. 


596 Chap. 13 Altered States 



Af >0 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 




* 

Ey 

Ey 

*2 

*1 

Ey 

Ey 

e 2 








Ey 


Ey 


*1 



m e u e > o ) 

on £, sub ensemble 
only 


Af = 0 

(f, sub-ensemble) 


Figure 13.2 Two energy measurements on an ensemble of infinite square wells whose 
particles are in the state (13.3) prior to the first measurement. After the first measurement, 
we select those systems that gave E x and re-measure the energy of this sub-ensemble. These 
systems exhibit only the value E\, for they are in a state in which the energy is sharp. 


One important use of such measurements is to “prepare” a system in a particular 
stationary state—say, for subsequent measurements of other properties. To prepare a system 
in this way, simply take an ensemble of systems, measure the energy, and create a sub¬ 
ensemble consisting of all members that exhibited the energy you want. Such preparations 
yield the initial conditions we have seen in previous examples in this book. 

Question 13-1 

Suppose the second energy measurement on the E\ sub-ensemble were carried out 
at, say, t = 10 sec. Would the results differ from those obtained in a second energy 
measurement immediately after the first measurement? Why or why not? 


Collapse of the State Function 

Physicists have a quaint name for the remarkable transformation of a wave function that 
occurs when a measurement is performed: the collapse of the state function (also known 
as reduction of the wave packet). This name is supposed to conjure up an image of the 
measurement causing the state function to “collapse” onto one of the eigenfunctions of 
the corresponding operator. A convenient way to represent collapse of the wave function 
is via a “branch diagram” like the one in Fig. 13.3. 



Figure 13.3 A branch diagram for 
collapse of the state function, here 
illustrated for an energy measurement 
on an ensemble of infinite square wells 
initially in the state (13.3). Each arrow to 
the right of the box that represents the 
measurement corresponds to one 

of the possibilities implicit in the state 
function prior to measurement. Each 
arrow is therefore labelled with one of 
the eigenvalues and with the projection of 
*(ar,0), the squared modulus of which is 
the probability that the measurement will 
cause the state of the system to “collapse” 
into this possible eigenstate. 


Sec. 13.2 The Effect of a Measurement on a State Function 597 




13.3 THE EVOLUTION OF A STATE AFTER COLLAPSE 


What happens after the collapse of a state function into an eigenstate? Well, if no further 
measurements are made, “natural Schrodinger evolution” takes over, and the state evolves 
according to the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation. In general, this development may 
be quite complicated and should be tackled using the machinery of Chap. 12. But if the 
observable measured was energy, the subsequent evolution of the state is simple, because 
the resulting state is an energy eigenstate. The time development of the wave function 
for an energy eigenstate was the subject of Chap. 7. 

To clarify the evolution of an eigenstate after collapse, we might think about the 
energy measurement as having “re-initialized” the state of each member in the ensemble. 
For example, the members of an ensemble that exhibit the eigenvalue E x in an energy 
measurement at t E = 0 (as in Example 13.2) have, immediately after the measurement , 
the new initial wave function 

¥i(s,0) =^i(4 (13.5) 

So at subsequent times their wave function is simply 

^(x y t) = il> i(x)e~ iElt/h t>t E = 0. (13.6) 

Be careful. If the measured observable is not energy, then the wave function after mea¬ 
surement does not necessarily have the simple time dependence (13.6). After perusing 
another example, we’ll reckon with measurements of arbitrary observables. 

Example 13.2. Molecular Measurements 

In Example 12.6 we deduced the state function of an ensemble of CO molecules from data 
obtained in an energy measurement at t = 0. In the measurement, 30% of the molecules 
exhibited the ground-state energy E 0 , and 70% exhibited the first excited state energy E\. 
From these facts, we reasoned that the initial wave function was a linear combination of the 
first two stationary states, as in Eq. (12.56). In that example, we chose (for simplicity) to 
model the vibrating CO molecule by a simple haimonic oscillator. So we wrote the initial 
wave function in terms of the eigenfunctions ip tl (x) of the SHO Hamiltonian, as 

^(rr,0) = e t6 °ipo(x) + e lf>l ij)\(x). (13.7a) 

Equation (13.7a) represents the state of the molecules before the measurement, when 
their energy was not sharp. But after this measurement, the energy is sharp. So the mea¬ 
surement transformed the original ensemble into two distinct sub-ensembles, one consisting 
of particles with (sharp) energy Eq, the other of particles with (sharp) energy E\. 

Correspondingly, the wave functions that represent the state of the molecules in each 
sub-ensemble after the energy measurement are one of two stationary-state wave functions, 


tyoixyt) = rl)o(x)e ,E ° l l n (13.7 b) 

— (x;t) = Tp\(xye-' Bl l ^ h . ---(-13i7e) 

We’re familiar (from Chap. 9) with the detailed nature of the Hamiltonian eigenfunctions 
and energies in these functions. 

Question 13-2 

Describe the results of a second energy measurement on each sub-ensemble. 


598 


Chap. 13 Altered States 



Measurement of Observables Other Than Energy 


We can easily extend the reasoning of this section to measurements of an arbitrary 
observable. The (partial) branch diagram in Fig. 13.4 shows what happens if we measure 

an observable Q represented by operator Q with eigenvalue equation Qx!» Q) = QnX !> Q) - 
Here’s the rule: 13 


Rule 

A measurement of Q will collapse the state into one of the eigenstates of Q. A member 
that exhibits the (non-degenerate) eigenvalue q n in M Q [£ Q ] will, immediately after the 
measurement, be in a state represented by the corresponding eigenfunction The 

probability that a member will be in this eigenstate is the squared modulus of the projection 
c ( Q ] (t) of on xS. Q) . 


The evolution of the state after measurement of an arbitrary observable differs in 
one very important respect from that of the state that results from a measurement of the 
energy. The eigenfunction of Q into which collapses clue to M Q [£ Q ] represents the 
state only in the instant after the measurement. As time passes, the state will evolve 
according to the TDSE (unless additional measurements are performed—a complication 
we 11 confront in the next section). Unlike the time development of the stationary state 
that results from an energy measurement, the evolution of this state, which is almost 
always non-stationary, could be very complicated. 

Question 13-3 

Can you think of any observable (or class of observables) other than ft whose measurement 
yields sub-ensembles whose subsequent evolution is described by a simple separable wave 
function? (Hint: See § 11.5.) 


'Hx, t) 



'Hx, t Q + St) = x, (x) 


*(x, t Q + St) = x 2 (x) 


*(X, t Q + St) = X 3 (x) 


'Hx, t Q + St) = X 4 (x) 


Figure 13.4 A branch diagram for the 
collapse of the state function due to the 
measurement of an arbitrary observable Q. 


13 As usual, I’ll consider only operators with discrete spectra. This rule, and others we shall deduce, 
applies with the usual modifications to operators whose spectra are continuous or mixed. 


Sec. 13.3 The Evolution of a State After Collapse 599 





Let’s review our two methods for obtaining the wave function for t > t Q . The 
direct way is to solve the TDSE 

r\ 

7 iV(x,t) = ih£- t V(x,t) (13.8) 

subject to the (new) initial condition ty(x t t Q ) = The easier (indirect) way is 

to expand ^(x,t) in the complete set of Hamiltonian eigenfunctions, as 

#(Mq) = ^^(tQ^nix). (13.9a) 

II 

Once we have determined the projections 

c!, E) (<q) = ((/>.. I ( 13 % ) 

we can easily write down the wave function that evolves from this initial function as 

9(x,t) = (13.9c) 

n 

Equation (13.9c) makes clear the point I noted above: in general the system will not re¬ 
main in the eigenstate of Q into which it was thrown by Mq[£q]. Its “natural Schrodinger 
evolution” causes the state to evolve into the one represented by this wave function—a 
state in which Q is not sharp. 

Question 13-4 

Explain the funny-looking time dependence in the exponential in (13.9c). 

Question 13-5 

Consider the special case that the observable measured is a constant of the motion, i.e., 
that [ Q , H] = 0, and that its spectrum is purely discrete (and non-degenerate). Argue (or 
prove) that in this special case , the complicated time dependence of Eq. (13.9c) reduces to 
the familiar form 

*(s,t) = Mx)e- iEn{t ~ tQ)/h . t > t Q (13.10) 

[Hint: Recall (§ 12.9: Proclamation 12.1) that all probabilistic and statistical quantities that 
refer to a constant of the motion of a system are independent of time.] 


*13.4 MULTIPLE MEASUREMENTS OF COMPATIBLE 
OBSERVABLES I 


Things then did not delay 
in turning curious ... 
there were revelations 
in progress all around her. 

= The-Crying-ofLot-4S >— 
by Thomas Pynchon 


We have seen that a measurement causes an uncontrollable, unavoidable change in a 
quantum state. This change comes about because the measurement necessarily involves 
an interaction between the observer and the system. This interaction causes the state to 


600 


Chap. 13 Altered States 



“collapse” into an eigenstate of the measured observable, so that afterward, this observ¬ 
able is sharp. According to the Born Interpretation of the state function, the probability 
of collapse into a particular eigenstate is the squared modulus of the projection of the 
state function (before measurement) on the corresponding eigenfunction of the operator 
that represents the measured observable. 

This summary suggests an interesting question: what happens to the state if we 
measure two observables simultaneously ? Each measurement can transform the state into 
an eigenstate of the measured observable; so we might guess that after both measurements 
the system would be in an eigenstate of both observables. But such an outcome may 
be impossible: if the observables are incompatible, then a simultaneous eigenstate is 
prohibited (§ 11.1 ). 14 But if so, then what does the simultaneous measurement do to the 
state? 

In the next three sections we’ll discover the answer. We begin, after a couple of 
important definitions and a quick review of compatibility, with a look at the simplest 
case: compatible observables. Then we take up the more arresting case of incompatible 
observables. And there we’ll learn how uncertainty principles work. 

A Simultaneous Measurement Defined 

Our starting point is the eigenvalue equations for two observables, Q and R, 

Qxi, Q) = (13.11a) 

(13.11ft) 

For the moment I want to leave unspecified the commutator of these operators; i.e., 
[Q> R] may or may not be zero. My notation for the eigenvalues, q n and r m , assumes, 
as usual, that the spectra of Q and R are purely discrete. (For instance, the examples in 
this section deal with measurement of the parity and total energy of a simple haimonic 
oscillator; the spectra for this H and for A are purely discrete.) I’ll denote the simulta¬ 
neous eigenfunctions of two compatible observables Q and R by the obvious extension 
of this notation, 

Now a little review. In Chap. 11 we learned that if two observables are compat¬ 
ible ( i.e ., if [Q,R] = 0 ), then their operators define a complete set of simultaneous 
eigenfunctions. In this case the Generalized Uncertainty Principle (13.1) allows us (in 
principle) to measure both simultaneously to infinite precision. If, on the other hand, the 
observables are incompatible (i.e., if 7 ^ 0 ), then such a set does not exist, and 

the precision of a simultaneous measurement of Q and R may be constrained by their 
uncertainty relation. 

Now, by a simultaneous measurement of Q and R we mean simply two mea¬ 
surements Mq[£q] and M;?[£/?] that are carried out one right after the other. That is, the 
time interval between the measurements, £/? - £q, is arbitrarily small . 15 

14 To keep the discussion in this section as simple as possible, I want to exclude the possibility of 
a single simultaneous eigenstate of Q and R. Although rare, such exceptions do occur—for example, the 
zero-angular-momentum state of a particle in three dimensions, which I noted in § 11.1. Such states merely 
muddy already opaque waters and are not directly relevant to our immediate concerns. 

15 Actually, the measurements we’ll consider differ from real measurements in that they induce the least 
possible change in the state of the system. I’ll tell you more about these “ideal” measurements later in this 
section. 


Sec. 13.4 Multiple Measurements of Compatible Observables I 601 



Simultaneous Measurement on an Eigenstate 

Suppose the measured observables are compatible, />., that [Q,R] = 0. In principle 
we can measure simultaneously and precisely the values of two compatible observables 
for any state. But the particular outcome of such a measurement depends on whether or 
not the state is a simultaneous eigenstate of Q and R. 

For example, suppose that prior to either measurement the ensemble is the simul¬ 
taneous eigenstate = xiS?- Then M Q [£ Q ] and M/?[£/?] leave the state unchanged. 
To understand why, look at the measurement diagram for this case. Fig. 13.5. In the 
initial state Q is sharp, with value q n . So in the first measurement, Mq[£q], all members 
exhibit the same value of Q, the eigenvalue q n . This measurement need not collapse the 
state into an eigenstate of Q. In fact, it need not change the state function at all. 

The same reasoning applies to the second measurement, M/?[</?]. In the state 
before (and after) Mq[£q], R is sharp, with value r m . So in M/?[£/?], each member 
exhibits the same value, r m , and this measurement, too, need not change the state. After 
all is said and done, the state function is the same as before either measurements, 

To summarize our conclusions: 


Rule 

A simultaneous measurement of two compatible observables on an eigenstate of both ob¬ 
servables does not change the state of the system. 


Example 13.3. Parity and Energy Measurements on a Stationary State 

In the next several examples, we’ll perform (in the laboratory of our imaginations) simul¬ 
taneous measurement of parity and energy on an ensemble of simple harmonic oscillators 
in various quantum states. We begin with the ground state —which is an eigenstate of both 
observables, with eigenvalues II = +1 and E = Eo. The measurement diagram for this 
experiment appears in Fig. 13.6. Compare this diagram carefully to the general one in 
Fig. 13.5. 

t<t Q 


Figure 13.5 A measurement diagram for simultaneous measurement of two 
compatible observables Q and R on a simultaneous eigenstate of these observ¬ 
ables. In the state prior to measurement, both observables are sharp, so the 
measurement does not change the stale or the wave function. 


M q [r^j] 


t n <t<t R 


Member yields (Q fl) 
x n<m 


Qn 


M n I^fll 


t > t R 

Member yields __ 


On Ideal Measurements 

You may be wondering: could the parity measurement M n [£n] in Fig. 13.6 change 
properties related to the energy? This is a thoughtful question: the laws of quantum 
physics guarantee only that the parity measurement need not change the energy properties 
of the system. That is different from saying that the measurement does not change these 
properties. 


602 


Chap. 13 Altered States 






t <t„ 


*(x, f) = t 0 e ,E ° tlh - 




f„ < f < t e 
Member yields ^ - /£ot/h 


t>t P 


+ 1 


Mglt E ) 


Member yields ^ ^ e ~iE 0 tl\\ 


Figure 13.6 A measurement diagram for simultaneous measurement of the parity and 
energy of a simple harmonic oscillator in the ground (stationary) state. Because this state 
is a simultaneous eigenstate of both observables, nothing remarkable happens to the wave 
function. The measurement simply confirms the (sharp) values n = +1 (even parity) and 
Eq = hoj/2. 

In this subtle issue lies a potential complication of the theory of measurement, for 
a teal measurement of one of two compatible observables could change the value of the 
other observable. The change could be extensive; for example, if the other observable 
were sharp before measurement, it could be rendered uncertain after. So a real parity 
measurement might leave the system in any state with definite parity. For example, 
the state of a simple harmonic oscillator after a measurement Mn[in] that yielded +1 
could be any even-parity eigenstate: the wave function could be for any even n or 
a linear combination of these even-n stationary states. 16 So a real measurement of the 
parity of the simple harmonic oscillator could change the energy of the system, even 
though energy and parity are compatible. But such an outcome is not possible in an 
ideal measurement. 

An ideal measurement is one that produces the minimum allowable disturbance 
in the physical properties of the system. This definition is a bit tricky, so read it again. 
Think about it a minute. An ideal measurement of an observable won’t change properties 
related to any observable that is compatible with the measured one unless such a change 
is mandated by the laws of quantum physics. 17 Thus, if we perform an ideal measurement 
of Q on an ensemble in a state in which an observable R (that is compatible with Q) is 
sharp, then after Mq[£q], the observable R will still be sharp, its value unchanged by 
the measurement. 

Simultaneous (Ideal) Measurements on an Arbitrary State 

The effect of measuring compatible observables on a simultaneous eigenstate is none too 
thrilling; nothing happens to the state. More interesting things happen when we measure 
two compatible observables on a system that is not in an eigenstate of one, the other, or 
both observables. To be specific, let’s consider the “worst case scenario”: a state in 
which before the measurement both Q and R are uncertain. 

In a simultaneous measurement on an ensemble initially in a state \I> with A Q > 0 
and A R > 0, different members may exhibit different eigenvalues of Q and R. For 
either Mq[£q] or M/{[£/?], we can calculate the probability that a member will exhibit 
a particular eigenvalue by squaring the modulus of the projection of # on the cor¬ 
responding eigenfunction immediately before the measurement. This much we know 

_ 16 Of course, an experiment in wh ich theparitywasioundtobeevencouldnotthrowthe-systeminto_ 

an odd-parity state, for that change would contradict the result of the measurement. 

17 Such a measurement will, however, transform the state if quantum mechanics says it must. If, forex- 
ample, the state prior to measurement is not an eigenstate of the measured observable, then the measurement- 
ideal or otherwise—must transform the state function into an eigenfunction of that observable. The distinction 
between an ideal and a real measurements will come more sharply into focus when we consider measurements 
of incompatible observables (§ 13.6), for a measurement of one such observable must change properties of the 
system related to the other observable. 


Sec. 13.4 Multiple Measurements of Compatible Observables I 603 





from Chaps. 11 and 12. From the present chapter we know that each measurement will 
collapse the state into an eigenstate of the measured observable. The aforementioned 
probabilities tell us the likelihood of finding a member in one or another eigenstate after 
the measurement. To see this phenomenon in action, follow Fig. 13.7 as we analyze a 
successive measurement of compatible observables Q and R. 




t>t„ 



Plq„.t Q )=\c { n a) [t Q )\ 


P(r m , f*)= IC’(f*)l 5 


Figure 13.7 A measurement diagram for simultaneous measurement of two compatible 
observables Q and R on a state that is initially not an eigenstate of either observable. 
Each measurement causes the state function to collapse into one of the eigenstates of the 
measured observable. The state after both measurements is a simultaneous eigenstate of 
both observables, a possibility allowed by the compatibility of Q and R. 


From § 12.2 we know that to predict the outcome of the first measurement, Mq[*q], 
we must discuss this measurement in “the language of Q” To translate the state function 
into this language, we expand V{x,t) in the complete set of eigenfunctions of Q\ 

n 

The number |c^ l) (£)| 2 is the probability that the eigenvalue q n will be obtained in 
M Q [t Q ]. A member that exhibits this value is thrown by the measurement into the 
n th eigenstate, so its eigenfunction immediately after Mq^q] is Hence |cg^(f )| 2 

is also the probability of a member system winding up in this eigenstate after Mq[£q). 

Now turn to the second measurement, of the compatible observable R. We’ll 
perform M/?[£/?] on the sub-ensemble of members that exhibited q n in Mq[Jq] (look 
carefully at Fig. 13.7). To predict the outcome of M R [t R ], we translate the problem into 
“the language of R ” by expanding the wave function after Mq[£q], which we just said 

was in the set of eigenfunctions of R: 18 

x' <?) W = E c « ,) WxL B, W- <13.13) 

m 

The probability of obtaining the eigenvalue r m in M/?[f/?] is just |cjj (t/i)| 2 , which is 
also the probability that immediately after this measurement, the system will be in the 
m th eigenstate of R. 

What is the ultimate effect of our simultaneous measurement? The first measure¬ 
ment collapsed each member of the original ensemble into an eigenstate of Q. The second 
further collapsed each member of each sub-ensemble into one of the eigenstates of R. 
So after both measurements, each member will be in one of the simultaneous eigenstates 
of both observables. 

We can prepare a state that is an eigenstate of several compatible observables by 
measuring one right after the other. (If, as is often the case, the observables are constants 

18 It may happen that xSi Q) is an eigenfunction of R—i.e., Mq[(q] could cause 'F to collapse into 
one of the simultaneous eigenfunctions of Q and R (whose existence is guaranteed by the commutativity of Q 
and R). In this special case, all the projections c { " l) (t) but one will be zero. (See Example 13.5.) 


604 


Chap. 13 Altered States 





of the motion , the simultaneity of their measurement is not important, because the system 
won’t evolve out of an eigenstate of a constant of the motion while it waits for you to 
perform the next measurement.) For example, to prepare an ensemble of simple harmonic 
oscillators in a simultaneous eigenstate of parity and energy, you could first measure II 
and then E. Or, if more convenient, you could measure E first, then II. 

Example 13.4. Parity and Energy Measurements on a Non-Stationary State 

Return now to the ensemble of simple harmonic oscillators of Example 13.3 and suppose 
that their state prior to measurement of parity and energy is the following non-stationary 
initial condition: 


*(z,0) = 


2ipo(x) 


even 



odd 


(13.14) 


This state is a superposition of one even-parity state (the ground state) and one odd-parity 
state (the first excited state). So for this state neither parity nor energy are sharp. We can 
analyze each measurement using the rules of § 13.2, as shown in Fig. 13.8. 


0<f <f 


ii 


t tn 


h 


t>t E 



t 0 ix) e 


-iE 0 t/h 


\Mx)e 


-iEyt/h 


An>o 


an = o" 

AE >0 

L — 


AE = 0 



Figure 13.8 A measurement diagram for simultaneous measurement of the par¬ 
ity and energy of a simple harmonic oscillator in the non-stationary state (13.14). 
Because this state is not an eigenstate of parity, the first measurement causes 
collapse into one of the parity eigenstates represented in the superposition. The 
resulting states are also energy eigenstates, so no further change of state occurs 
when energy is measured. 


The parity measurement causes each member to collapse into one of two parity 
eigenstates, with probabilities determined by the projections in Eq. (13.14): 1/5 of the 
systems wind up in the even-parity ground state, and 4/5 in the odd-parity first excited state. 
But each of the resulting states is also an energy eigenstate. So the second measurement, 
—Ms[tE]rneed not (andrin an ideal measurementrdoes not) furtheralter the state7"After”all 
is said and done, the system is in a simultaneous eigenstate of parity and energy. 

Question 13-6 

Equation (13.14) gives the wave function at the initial time t = 0. Write down the form of 
the state function for times between t = 0 and £n- 


Sec. 13.4 Multiple Measurements of Compatible Observables I 605 




Question 13-7 

I don’t have space here to discuss in detail the calculation of joint probabilities for measure¬ 
ments of multiple observables. However, to see how one puts such probabilities together, 
explain in detail why the probability of obtaining q n and r„, in a simultaneous measurement 
of compatible observables Q and R on a system not in an eigenstate of either observable is 

P( 9 ,„r,„) = l(xi Q > | «(t<j))l , l(Xm > | x!. Q, )| 2 . ( 13 . 15 ) 

What would the joint probability be if x ( m > happened to be orthogonal to What 

would it be if the state prior to either measurement were an eigenstate of Q but not of 
... of R but not of Q? 

Analyzing the non-stationary state in Example 13.4 was particularly simple, be¬ 
cause this superposition included only one even-parity and one odd-parity term. As a 
consequence of this simplicity, the second measurement M e[Ie\ played no significant 
role in determining the final state. This situation is the exception, not the rule, as we’ll 
see in the next section. 


*13.5 MULTIPLE MEASUREMENTS II: AN EXAMPLE 

To show you how to cope with measurements on a more complicated state, I want to 
return to the ensemble of simple harmonic oscillators, this time considering the following 
initial condition: 19 


= \J ^ [2^oW+ 3 W^) (13.16) 


odd 


In the absence of a measurement, this state would evolve according to the TDSE, as 





2Mx)e- iEot/h +tyi{x)e~ iE ' t/h - ^ 2 (x)e~ iE ^ h . 


(13.17) 


But suppose that at time t n = 0, we measure the parity of the system. 20 This state 
is clearly not an eigenstate of parity, for it contains one term whose parity is odd and two 
whose parities are even. So to determine the outcome and effect of Mn [£n]» we turn to the 
method of eigenfunction expansion. Fortunately, we don’t have to explicitly translate the 
function in (13.16) into the “language” of another observable to implement this method, 
because each energy eigenfunction of this system is also a parity eigenfunction. [That is, 
the expansion of ^(x,f) we use to predict the outcome of a parity measurement looks 
identical to the one we would use to analyze an energy measurement.] But we do need 
to think carefully about the meaning of the coefficients in Eq. (13.16). 

Let’s look first at the odd-parity possibility. It’s a trivial matter to calculate from 
Eq. (T3.-16)-the probability that in M n jtn] ajnember wilLexhibit t he value -1. Since 
the coefficient of the odd-parity term in (13.16) is c^'^O) = 3/\/38, we have 


1<J This section contains the most complicated example yet of multiple measurements. If you are running 
out of time, you can omit it and press on to the next section. 

' 20 I choose t n = 0 solely to simplify the form of some of the results in this example. This choice in 
no way affects the physics or problem-solving strategy. 


606 


Chap. 13 Altered States 



^(-Mn) = 


2 


(13.18) 


= 0.2368. 

Analyzing the other possibility, that Mn[£n] will collapse the oscillator into an 
even-parity state, is a bit trickier. There are two terms in (13.16) that correspond to this 
possibility: the ground state, with probability amplitude 2/\/38, and the second excited 
state, with amplitude —5/\/38. So the overall probability of getting IT = +1 in Mn[t n ] 
is the sum of the probabilities for each of these terms: 


-P(+Mn) 



0.7632. 


(13.19) 


Notice that, satisfyingly, the probabilities for the two possible outcomes of the parity 
measurement sum to one. 

It may help to think about this analysis in the following way: it’s as if there were 
two “routes” to even parity: one corresponding to the ground state, the other to the 
second excited state. In probability theory we add probabilities for mutually-exclusive 
possibilities, so Eq. (13.19) is the correct way to calculate the probability of (one way 
or the other) getting even parity in M n [inl- But careful with this analogy; the parity 
measurement does not throw members that yield +1 into one or the other of the stationary 
states V'o(z) or ip 2 (x)\ rather, as we’ll see in a moment, this measurement forces them 
into an (unknown) superposition of these states. 


Warning 

Note that we add the probabilities for the two (or more) terms that correspond to the same 
value of a measurement observable, not the probability amplitudes. 


Question 13-8 

How would Eqs. (13.18) and (13.19) change if in > 0? 

Question 13-9 

There are only two possible outcomes of Mn[tn]: +1 and -1. The sum of the probabilities 
for these outcomes, Eqs. (13.18) and (13.19) is, happily, equal to 1. Suppose we computed 
■P(+l, in) by adding the probability amplitudes rather than the probabilities. Show that this 
gambit does not lead to a total probability of 1. 

The states of the two sub-ensembles created by the parity measurement are indicated 
in the diagram in Fig. 13.9. Understanding the odd-parity outcome is easy. Since the 
only odd-parity tenn in the wave function prior to Mn[£n]> Eq. (13.16), is the one for the 
first excited state, each member that exhibits II = -1 collapses into this eigenstate. The 
wave function of such a member after Mn[fn] is therefore iJj\{ x)e~ lElt ^ h . Were we to 
perform a subsequent energy measurement on the sub-ensemble of odd-parity oscillators, 
we would find only the value E\ = 3hcj a /2. So the odd-parity sub-ensemble behaves 
just like the one in Example 13.4. 

Not so the even-parity sub-ensemble. The rules of quantum mechanics demand that 
the state of this sub-ensemble after Mn[^n] be an eigenstate of El with eigenvalue +1. 
But these rules do not specify which even-parity state will result. In a real measurement, 


Sec. 13.5 Multiple Measurements II: An Example 607 





§f“V 0 
(A£ = 0) 


AE> 0 

[An = oi 

All = 0 

An > o 


A£ = 0 


Figure 13.9 Measurement diagram for a simultaneous measurement of parity and energy on the 
initial SHO state represented by Eq. (13.16). The superposition referred to as the even-parity 
outcome of M„[<n] is given in Eq. (13.20). 


the resulting state could be the ground state, the second excited state, or a superposition 
of the two, i.e., 

*(a,t) = 4 E) (OV’o(*)e~ iBo " 1 +4 81 (()^We _iE,1,# . (13.20) 

But we are here considering only ideal measurements, and for such a measurement we 
can determine the ratio of to d\ E \t) in (13.20). Let’s see how. 

An ideal measurement of parity introduces the least possible disturbance in the 
energy-related properties of the system. This does not mean that Mn[tn] doesn’t change 
these properties at all. For example, the state for t < tn, Eq. (13.16), allows for the 
possibility that a member will exhibit E\ in a subsequent energy measurement. But this 
possibility is not present in the (even-parity) superposition (13.20). What, then, does 
“least possible disturbance” mean in this case? 

Well, one important energy-related property of the system prior to Mn[tn] is that 
the energy of a particle is not sharp. Since the parity measurement need not collapse 
members that exhibit II = +1 into an energy eigenstate, it won’t do so—and the energy 
of the even-parity ensemble after an ideal Mn[£n] will still not be sharp. 21 That is, 
the disturbance in the energy-related properties of the state (13.20) will be less if both 
coefficients d,Q E \t) and d^ E \t) are non-zero than if one of them is zero. 

To pin down the coefficients in Eq. (13.20), we must think more deeply about 
this matter of a “minimal disturbance.” 22 The squared moduli of these coefficients are 
probabilities: e.g., jdo (£)| 2 is the probability that an energy measurement on the sub- 


2, Careful now. It should be evident from Eqs. (13.16) and (13.20) that the value of A E will be 
changed by the parity measurement. If not, glance ahead to Table 13.1. 

22 Sec H. Araki and M. M. Yanese, Phys. Rev. A, 120, 622 (I960) and J. Cohn, Amer. Jour. Phys., 36, 
749 (1968). 


608 Chap. 13 Altered States 






ensemble in this state will yield the value Eq = Juoq/2. That is, these coefficients 
contain information about the distribution of possible energies that is implicit in the wave 
function Eq. (13.20). The least possible disturbance in the energy-related properties of 
the oscillator is one that doesn’t change this distribution for the allowed energies E 0 and 
E 2 from what it was before Mn[£n)- 

For these two energies, the probability amplitudes in the state before the parity 
measurement are to be found in Eq. (13.16). These amplitudes correspond to a distribu¬ 
tion in which the probability for Eq is 4/38 = 0.1053 and for E 2 is 25/38 = 0.6579. 
The ratio of the probability for E 2 to that for Eq is 6.25. We can preserve the energy 
distribution for Eq and E 2 by choosing the coefficients in the state function after M n [in] 
[in Eq. (13.20)] to maintain this ratio: 


i4 E) wi 2 i4 E) (t)i 2 

i4 E) (0P i4 E) (t)p 


(13.21) 


This reasoning may seem complicated, so here’s a summary. To minimize the 
effect of a parity measurement on the energy properties of the oscillator we must ensure 
that there is no change due to Mn[£n] in the relative probabilities for obtaining the 
energies of the ground state and the second-excited state, the only two possibilities for 
the even-parity sub-ensemble. The probabilities for these energies are just the squared 
moduli of the energy probability amplitudes in the state functions before and after the 
parity measurement, so by equating the ratio of these squared moduli as in (13.21) we 
can preserve the relative probabilities. 

We cannot preserve the absolute energy probabilities, because the wave function 
before M n [£n] contains a possibility that is not present for the even-parity sub-ensemble 
that results from this measurement—namely, the possibility of the (odd-parity) first ex¬ 
cited state. The presence in Eq. (13.16) of this possibility, represented by the term 
proportional to ipi(x) e~ iEit / h t affects the values of the coefficients ch E \t) in this func¬ 
tion, because these coefficients must be normalized so that 


I *> = 4 £) 


+ 


„(£) 


+ 


,(£)!_ 


= l 


t < £n- 


(13.22) 


[This requirement is reflected in the prefactor l/\/38 in Eq. (13.16).] The corresponding 
normalization condition for the state (13.20) (after the parity measurement) is 


<*!*> = 




= i 


t > in- 


(13.23) 


Now, if you’re still with me, all we need do is choose 4, E) (£) and d[ E \t) to 
conform to Eqs. (13.21) and (13.23). Doing so leads to a wave function that is almost 
completely determined. The remaining indeterminacy is a familiar one: we cannot 
specify the phase of each coefficient in (13.20). Denoting the phase constants for the 
J?o and ^2 terms by ^o and <$ 2 , respectively ,_we can write (finally!) the form of the state 
function after an ideal parity measurement: 





2e , '*> e~ iE ° t/h + 5e id2 fo(x) e ~ iE ^ h '. 


(13.24) 


Whew! 


Sec. 13.5 Multiple Measurements II: An Example 609 



Question 13-10 

Verify that the wave function (13.24) is correctly normalized. Now calculate the probabilities 
that would be obtained in an energy measurement using this normalized wave function and 
verify that (13.24) predicts the same relative distribution for E 0 and E 2 as does (13.16). 

Let’s examine the state function (13.24) to see what changes the parity measure¬ 
ment has wrought. Recall that before M n [fn], energy and parity were uncertain. The 
superposition state after this measurement has the following properties: 

1 . An = o 

2. AE > 0 

3. the relative distribution of energy probabilities for E 2 and E 0 is the same as before 
MnM [Eq. (13.21)]. 

A closer look reveals that the values of the statistical properties related to en¬ 
ergy were changed by the parity measurement. This change is evident in Table 13.1, 
which contains the values of the expectation value and uncertainty in the energy be¬ 
fore and after M n [£n]- The “after values” in this table correspond to the even-parity 
sub-ensemble. This change should come as no great surprise, because the mixture 
of energy eigenstates in this sub-ensemble is different from that of the original 
ensemble. 


TABLE 13.1 STATISTICAL ENERGY- 
RELATED PROPERTIES BEFORE AND 
AFTER THE PARITY MEASUREMENT 



Before 

After 

(E) 

(E 2 > 

A E 

2.0526 hojo 

4.6711 h 2 u>Q 

0.6767 hu>o 

2.2241 hu o 

5.4224 h 2 J* 

0.6898 hu o 


Question 13-11 

Verify each of the values in Table 13.1. (This exercise is easy and provides valuable 
practice.) 


One reason for going through the analysis leading to Eq. (13.24) is that we need this 
wave function to predict the outcome of the second measurement, which you may have 
forgotten. At the beginning of this section, we proposed to follow the parity measurement 
by an energy measurement. The analysis of this second experiment is quite simple, as 
you can see by another look at Fig. 13.9. 

An energy measurement has no effect on the state of the odd-parity sub-ensemble. 
It does, however, collapse the members of the even-parity sub-ensemble into one of Two 
energy eigenstates—either the ground state or the second excited state. The probabilities 
for these outcomes are easy to calculate from (13.24), to wit: 


P(E 0 ) = 0.14 
P(E 2 ) = 0.86. 


(13.25) 


610 Chap. 13 Altered States 




Question 13-12 

According to (13.18) the probability of a member of the original ensemble winding up with 
sharp energy E\ is 9/38 = 0.24. The sum of this and the probabilities in (13.25) is 1.24. 
But the probability of a member winding up with energy Eq or E\ or E 2 should be 1. 
What went wrong? 

Summary 

Simultaneous measurement of compatible observables is not forbidden by the laws of 
quantum mechanics. If the state prior to the experiment happens to be a simultaneous 
eigenstate of the measured observables, then the measurement need not—and in an ideal 
measurement will not—change the state. But if the initial state is not an eigenstate 
of either observable, then the measurement forces the members into a state in which 
both observables are sharp. These conclusions, however, depend on the compatibility 
of the measured observables. What happens if the little beggars are incompatible? Stay 
tuned. 


13.6 DUELING OBSERVABLES: MULTIPLE MEASUREMENTS 
OF INCOMPATIBLE OBSERVABLES 


Ah! my dear Watson, there we come 
into those realms of conjecture, 
where the most logical mind 
may be at fault. 

Each may fonn his own hypothesis 
upon the present evidence, 
and yours is as likely to be correct 
as mine. 

—Sherlock Holmes, 

in The Adventure of the Empty House 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 


The easiest part of analyzing a multiple measurement is determining the effect of the 
first experiment. Whether or not the observables are compatible, the first measurement 
collapses the system into a state in which the measured observable is sharp (unless, of 
course, the system was already in such a state). The fun begins when we turn to the 
second measurement, which forces the system into an eigenstate of the other observable. 
If this observable is incompatible with the first, then the state after the second experiment 
is one in which the first observable is no longer sharp. That is, measuring one observable 
can change the properties of the system relating to another. As we’ll see, this seemingly 
magical alteration of the state is an unavoidable consequence of the non-commutativity 
of the operators that represent the measured observables. 

Inescapable Changes of State 

You must remember this: non-commuting operators do not define a complete set of 
simultaneous eigenfunctions. In general, no states exist in which the uncertainties of two 
non-commuting operators are zero. (Recall that we agreed to exclude the exceptional case 

Sec. 13.6 Multiple Measurements of Incompatible Observables 611 



of a single simultaneous eigenfunction of two non-commuting operators.) For example, 
if Q and R do not commute, then in any eigenstate of Q the incompatible observable 
R must be uncertain, and vice versa. This familiar property is the key to understanding 
multiple measurements of incompatible observables. 

Let’s consider only the “second” measurement. That is, let’s pretend that we are 
given an ensemble of systems that are initially in an eigenstate of Q, 23 

\1>(£, 0) = ( state P rior t0 M R [t R ] ] (13.26) 

On this ensemble we are going to measure the incompatible observable R at £/?. In the 
state (13.26) the observable Q is sharp, i.e. 

AQ(0) = 0 [state prior to M/?[£/?]] (13.27) 

In the measurement M/*[£/?] each member of the ensemble could exhibit any of the 
eigenvalues of R [see Eq. (13.11b)]. But not all members will exhibit the same value, 
for R is necessarily uncertain: 

Ai?(0) > 0 [state prior to M/?[f/?] ] (13.28) 

To learn more about the outcome of M /?[£/?], we could use the machinery of 
Chap. 12 to predict the probabilities for each allowed value. We translate the state 
function (13.26) into the language of R via expansion in the complete set {xi/^}. viz., 

#(*,0) = £cW(0)xS„ fl) (z)- 03-29) 

m 

The probability amplitude for eigenvalue r m is 

o) = <xi,? } | m) = (*!,?> I x< Q) >. < 13 - 30 > 

In the initial state x« Q \ the observable R cannot be sharp, so the probabilities P(r m , 0) = 
IcJjf^O)! 2 will be non-zero for at least two of the eigenvalues r m . 

There is nothing particularly unusual in the analysis of Eqs. (13.28)-( 13.30). But 
now let’s turn to the “Q-related properties” of the state after measurement of R. This 
measurement changed the state function into an eigenfunction of R. For example, the 
sub-ensemble of members that exhibited r m in M/?[f/f] winds up in a state represented 
by the corresponding eigenfunction: 

^(a;,0) = x\n\ x ) t an instant after M/?[£/?]] (13.31) 

If we calculate A Q for this state, we get a positive number; i.e., in the state after M/*[£/?], 
the observable Q must be uncertain. The reason, as argued above, is simply that the 
state function that results from M n[tn] cannot be one in which both Q and R are sharp, 
for such simultaneous eigenstates (of incompatible observables) do not exist. 


23 For convenience, we’ll initialize our clock (t = 0) at the instant prior to tR. In practice, we could 
have prepared the system in such a state by measuring Q immediately before the measurement of R, i.e., at 
tji — 6t. From the resulting members, we select a sub-ensemble of systems that exhibited the same eigenvalue 
of Q. [If Q is a constant of the motion, we could have performed Mq[<q] a finite time before M /?[*/?], for 
once Mq[<q] has collapsed the system into an eigenstate of a constant of the motion, it will remain in that 
eigenstate, evolving according to the TDSE, until a second measurement (of an incompatible observable) is 
performed.] 


612 Chap. 13 Altered States 



So a multiple measurement of incompatible observables 
flop” between eigenstates of each observable, 24 


t <tR 



[ 

o o' 
II A 
Q> Q- 
<1 <1 

" -> 

M/?[£;?] 

^ { 


causes the state to “flip- 
t>tR 

AQ > 0 < l3 - 32 > 

Aft = 0 


So here is the rule for this case: 


Rule 

Measurement of one of two incompatible observables (on a state in which the other ob¬ 
servable is sharp) induces an unavoidable, uncontrollable uncertainty in the unmeasured 
observable. 


Example 13.5. The Anharmonic Oscillator 

In Chap. 9 we studied at length the stationary states of the simple harmonic oscillator. These 
energy eigenstates are also parity eigenstates, because the potential energy 

V{x) = \muW (13.33) 

is symmetric with respect to x = 0, i.e., V(—x) = V(x). 

The SHO is a valuable model of low-energy vibrational states of diatomic molecules. 
To use it thus, we let x in (13.33) represent the deviation of the intemuclear separation R 
from its equilibrium value R e , i.e., x = R - R e . But this model is crude, and to represent 
accurately the vibrational states of some molecules (particularly high-lying states) we must 
resort to model potentials that more accurately reflect the shape of the molecular potential 
curve [c.f., Fig. 9.14]. One prominent feature of such actual molecular potentials is their 
lack of symmetry about equilibrium, the point R — R c . So one criterion we would build into 
a more accurate model potential V^ M *(a;) is this lack of symmetry with respect to x — 0, 

V {M \-x) £ y (M, (®). (13.34) 

Because of this condition, the Hamiltonian of a particle of mass m with such 
a model potential, 

H {M) = £- + V {M) (x) (13.35) 

2m 

does not commute with the parity operator. So for this model, parity and energy are 
incompatible, and there are no simultaneous eigenstates of these observables. Unlike the 
stationary states of the SHO, those of the more realistic Hamiltonian 

«("Vi") = (13.36) 

arerroralso eigenstates of parityr ~ 

24 Note carefully that this change occurs even though the measurement is “ideal.” An ideal measurement 
of one of two compatible observables need not—and therefore does not—change the properties of the other 
observable. But any measurement of one of two incompatible observables may have to change the properties 
of the other observable. If such a measurement is ideal, however, these changes are minimal (consistent with 
the laws of quantum physics). 


Sec. 13.6 Multiple Measurements of Incompatible Observables 613 





Question 13-13 

Devise an asymmetric potential V* M \x) and for it, evaluate the commutator of H (M) and 
the parity operator. Write down the Generalized Uncertainty Principle for energy and parity. 
Discuss the implications of your answer for measurement of the energy on various kinds of 
states of this system. 

With this background, let’s consider a state of a molecule whose vibrational motion 
we represent with an asymmetric potential. For my own nefarious reasons, I want to 
consider what may seem to you a capricious choice of initial condition: suppose the 
state of interest is initially in the ground state of the simple harmonic oscillator potential. 
That’s right: even though we are not using the SHO to model the molecule, we’ll 
consider the initial wave function 


V{x,0) ='ip 0 (x) = 




e ~^/\ 


(13.37) 


where, of course, our old friend (3 is just y/mu 0 /h. This wave function is an eigenfunction 
of II, so at the instant t = 0 the particle is in a parity eigenstate. What does this mean 
about the energy at this instant? 

The energy must be uncertain, for there are no simultaneous eigenfunctions of 
A/ > and ft. The function (13.37) is an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian of the simple 
harmonic oscillator, not of the asymmetric Hamiltonian (13.36). So if (13.37) is the initial 
condition of a particle in such a potential, it represents a state for which A£(0) > 0. 

Now let’s imagine measuring the energy at <£ = 0. Of course, each member of the 
ensemble will yield one of the eigenvalues I?, (A/) of Eq. (13.36). The energy probability 
amplitudes are just the projections of the state function immediately before M e^e) on 
the eigenfunctions V>» A/) of (13.36). These amplitudes appear in the expansion 

$( X ,0) = £c<, E >m!, A '>(x). (13.38) 

n=0 


For the initial state (13.37), they are 25 

cj, B) (0) = (*<"> I *(0)> = I i/>o). (13.39) 

The probabilities |ci, E *(0)| 2 describe the likelihood that each member of the original en- 
semble will wind up in one of the shaip-energy sub-ensembles that results from M e^e}- 
Our energy measurement has dramatically changed the energy properties of the 
original ensemble. But it has also changed the parity properties, even though we did 
not measure this observable. The parity of the initial state (13.37) was sharp; the parity 
of each sub-ensemble created by M e^eI is not sharp. Because ft does not commute 
with V an energy measurement collapses the system into a state in-which parity_is._ 
uncertain—another flip-flop: 


25 Notice that the integral represented by the Dirac braket | V'o) is not equal to 6„,o- The 

function ^o(x) is an eigenfunction of the SHO Hamiltonian, while is an eigenfunction of our model 

Hamiltonian. 


614 


Chap. 13 Altered States 



t <t£ 

An = o 
A£>0 




1 t>ts 

An > 0 0 3.40) 

AE = 0 


Question 13-14 

Draw a branch diagram like the one in Fig. 13.8 for the energy measurement in this example. 
Then add to your diagram additional branches to show the outcome of a subsequent measure¬ 
ment of the parity on each sub-ensemble that resulted from the initial energy measurement. 
(To simplify your diagram, show only three branches resulting from each measurement.) 
Discuss briefly how the system evolves during the time interval after Me^e] and before 
Mn[<n]- 


Example 13.6. The Energy and Linear Momentum of a SHO 

In § 13.3 we explored simultaneous measurements of the energy and parity of a one¬ 
dimensional simple harmonic oscillator, two compatible observables. Two observables of 
this system we know to be incompatible are the energy and linear momentum. In Exam¬ 
ple 11.2 we derived the commutator of their operators, 

\H,p\ = ihmJlx. (13.41) 

The non-commutativity of ii and p implies that in an eigenstate of one of these operators, 
the other operator must be uncertain. The uncertainties and eigenfunctions are summarized 
in Table 13.2. 


TABLE 13.2 ENERGY AND MOMENTUM EIGENSTATES 
OF THE SIMPLE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR. 


Energy Eigenstates 

Momentum Eigenstates 

AE — 0 

i/>n(x) (Table 9.6) 

Ap = yj{n + i)?nu>o/i > 0 

Ap = 0 

Xp (x) = (2tt ft)-i/2 c -ip*/A 

A E > 0 


Aside: Momentum and the Energy. It may strike you as curious that the 
momentum eigenfunction Xi>{ x )< which is an energy eigenstate of the free par¬ 
ticle , represents a state of the simple harmonic oscillator in which the energy 
is not sharp. We can easily convince ourselves that the energy in this state is 
indeed uncertain. The energy uncertainty is 

= \J (£ 2 ) - (£) 2 . (13.42) 

For a momentum eigenstate, both {T) and (T 2 ) are zero_(Why?) So the 

energy uncertainty (13.42) simplifies to 

A E= \J{V 2 )-{V) 2 (13.43a) 

= \mwlyj{x 2 ) - (a;) 2 . (13.43/?) 


Sec. 13.6 Multiple Measurements of Incompatible Observables 615 





Now, the mean value of position for a momentum eigenstate, ( x ), is zero; but 
(x 2 ) > 0 (see the next Question). This is why the energy of a SHO in a 
momentum eigenstate is uncertain: A E > 0. 

Question 13-15 

It is not necessary to evaluate (x 2 ) to convince yourself that this quantity must be 
positive for the SHO. Argue the case from the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle and 
the expression for the position uncertainty that is analogous to (13.42). 


Suppose we measure the linear momentum and select from the results the sub- 
ensemble corresponding to the eigenvalue po- 2G Immediately after M p [£ p ], at time £e, 
we measure the energy. The branch diagram for this measurement is shown in Fig. 13.10. 


x Po W 



Ap =0 
Af >0 




-iE 0 t /h 


V ^[x)e ,flf/h 

Figure 13.10 A branch diagram for an 
' 3 * energy measurement on a simple harmonic 
oscillator that is initially in a momentum 
Af = 0 eigenstate. For simplicity, only three of the 

Ap > 0 infinity of branches are shown. 


The energy measurement causes the system to collapse into an energy eigenstate. The 
probability of a member winding up in the n ih stationary state of the SHO is, as usual, 

P{E,„t E ) = Kv.. I Xra)f n = 0,1,2 . (13.44) 

The first few probabilities are easy to evaluate; we worked out the integrals (rp n | Xpo) 
for n = 0 and n — 1 in Chap. 12, while toiling in Example 12.8. For instance, from 
Eq. (12.123 a) we find (ip 0 | Xj>o)* which we can use in (13.44) to determine the probability 
that a member will collapse into the ground state: 

P(£o.te) = (13.45) 

4pn\/7r 


Question 13-16 

Evaluate the probability that a member will exhibit the value Ei = 3fru>o/2 in the 
energy measurement. 

Fine. But the central question here is what has the energy measurement done to the 
momentum properties of the oscillator ? Remember that the state prior to Me[£e] was 
characterized by a sharp momentum, p = po- But after Me[£e], the system is in an 
energy eigenstate, so its linear momentum is uncertain (see Table 13.2). For ex ample, the 
momentum uncertainty for the sub-ensemble with energy Eo is Ap(£s -1- 6t) = y/mhuJo/2. 

—Once again a measurement of one of two incompatible observables (here the energy) has 
changed characteristics of the system that relate to the other, unmeasured observable (here, 
the momentum). 

26 As we know from Chap. 8, momentum eigenstates are not normalizable and hence do not truly exist 
in nature. So to be precise in this analysis, we should speak of a sub-ensemble of systems in a state represented 
by a very fat wave packet whose momentum probability amplitude is very sharply peaked about pa. 


616 


Chap. 13 Altered States 



Uncertainty in Action 


We have seen that after measurement of one of two incompatible observables, the system 
is in a state in which the unmeasured observable is necessarily uncertain. Imagine a 
series of successive measurements of two incompatible observables: first Mq[£q], then, 
immediately thereafter, M then Mq^q] again, .... These measurements cause 
the system to “flip-flop” between states in which one or the other of the observables (but 
not both) is sharp. 

Uncertainty originates in the commutator properties of operators and in the formal 
relationship between commutativity and the possible existence of simultaneous eigen¬ 
states. The genesis and role of uncertainty in the mathematics of quantum physics is 
one of the most profound examples of a theme I have emphasized throughout this book: 
an understanding of the physics of microscopic systems, at the experimental level of mea¬ 
surement and prediction of their properties, is inextricably linked to an understanding of 
the abstract mathematics of quantum mechanics. This deep interrelationship, which goes 
far beyond the mere assertion that “mathematics is the language of physics,” is one of 
the great and abiding beauties of quantum physics. 


13.7 FINAL THOUGHTS: MYSTERIES ABOUND 


... every branch of human knowledge 
if traced up to its source 
and final principles 
vanishes into mystery. 

—The Novel of the White Powder 
by Arthur Machen 

In this chapter, we have delved into one of the great mysteries of nature: the effect of 
measurement on a quantum state. Actually, the effect itself is not mysterious—quantum 
mechanics provides a representation of the various states of a system that could result 
from a measurement and a way to calculate the probabilities that the system will wind 
up in each of these states. The mystery is, how does this work? By what magic does the 
interaction of a microscopic system and a measuring apparatus bring about this change? 
This is the problem of measurement , and I don’t have a satisfactory solution to it. 

One response to this problem is to ignore it, i.e., just accept quantum mechanics 
as a collection of (remarkably successful) tools for the quantitative analysis of physical 
systems. I suspect that this is the attitude of most practicing physicists. It is the stance 
that the Nobel laureate Richard P. Feynman recommends in his wonderful book The 
Character of Physical Law (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967): 

There was a time when the newspapers said that only twelve men understood the 
theory of relativity. I do not believe that there ever was such a time. ... On the 

_other-hand, Lthink it is safe-to say-thaLno_one_understands_quantum_inechanics_ 

Do not keep saying to yourself, if you can possibly avoid it, “But how can it be like 
that?” because you will get “down the drain” into a blind alley from which nobody 
has yet escaped. Nobody knows how it can be like that. 

Underlying the problem of measurement there is a deeper question. As a conse¬ 
quence of an ensemble measurement of an observable Q, the original state collapses into 


Sec. 13.7 Final Thoughts: Mysteries Abound 617 




one of the eigenstates of Q. The question is: what mechanism determines which eigen¬ 
state a particular member collapses into? According to the conventional epistemology 
of quantum mechanics, the answer is that random chance governs what happens to each 
member of an ensemble. Many (your author included) consider this no answer at all. 

This question lurks just beneath the surface of most of the examples in this chapter. 
In Example 13.2, for example, we considered a system that prior to measurement was in 
a superposition of two eigenstates of the observable being measured. Upon measurement, 
each member collapses into one of these eigenstates. 27 This much quantum mechanics 
can tell us. It can also tell us the probability that each member will collapse into one 
of these eigenstates. What it cannot tell us is precisely what will happen to a particular 
member of the ensemble. That information is forever shrouded in the fundamental 
unknowability of nature. 

No less a figure than Albert Einstein found this situation unsatisfactory. In a letter 
to Max Born in 1926, Einstein wrote 28 


Quantum mechanics is very impressive. But an inner voice tells me that it is not yet 
the real thing. The theory produces a good deal but hardly brings us closer to the 
secret of the Old One. I am at all events convinced that He does not play dice. 


Always More Questions 


Since the early days of quantum theory, physicists have tried to understand the collapse of 
the state function. Perhaps the most remarkable of these efforts is that of John Von Neu¬ 
mann. In his research on measurement theory, Von Neumann used quantum mechanics 
to describe both the (microscopic) systems on which a measurement is performed and the 
(macroscopic) measuring apparatus. The central question he addressed is: at what step 
in the measurement process does the collapse of the wave function occur ? For example, 
in the single slit experiment (§ 13.2), does the wave packet collapse into an eigenstate of 
position when the electron interacts with phosphor molecules at the detector? ... when 
these molecules emit a photon, enabling us to see that the electron has arrived? ... when 
an observer sees one of the photons? ... or at some other point in the experiment? 

Von Neumann arrived by a mathematical analysis at a remarkable answer: the 
collapse of the wave function of a quantum system occurs when a physical signal from a 
measurement device is registered by a human consciousness. From this conclusion, some 
physicists have come to an even more astounding inference: microscopic particles do 
not have well-defined physical attributes until a human mind perceives that they do. 

Such conclusions seem extreme. Yet, they are logically consistent with the Copen¬ 
hagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. As you might imagine, this state of affairs 

27 A state function cannot collapse into an eigenstate that is not represented in its expansion in eigen¬ 
functions of the operator that represents the measured observable. That is, if the projection of the state function 
on a particular eigcnfunctionjs zero, then t he pro bability of finding t he system in that ei g enstat e aft er mea- 
surcment is j0| 2 = 0. Obviously, a measurement of the observable cannot collapse the state function into such 
an eigenfunction. 

28 Quoted in A. Pais’s scientific biography of Einstein, "Subtle Is the Lord ...” The Science and Life of 
Albert Einstein (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980). If you have even the slightest interest in Einstein as a scientist 
or as a man, you should rush out right now and buy a copy of this splendid book. Einstein’s correspondence 
with Born sheds considerable light on quantum physics; it has been collected in The Born-Einstein Letters, 
edited by M. Bom (New York: Walker, 1971). 


618 Chap. 13 Altered States 



has led many physicists to search for alternative interpretations. Their fascinating theories 
are, alas, outside the scope of this book. 29 

The End of All Our Exploring 

So to what place have we come? We have learned the underlying concepts, basic tools, 
and fundamental laws of quantum mechanics, a powerful and successful mathematical 
theory for predicting the behavior of microscopic systems. We have seen how quantum 
theory reduces to classical physics in the appropriate limit. And we have learned how 
to express its concepts in terms of state functions and operators and how to manipulate 
these elements to solve practical problems. (You will see much more of this in Volume II 
of this book.) Yet, quantum theory remains fraught with mysteries and marvels. 

Einstein went to his grave convinced that in some fundamental way, quantum 
mechanics is incomplete. Even now, the issue is unresolved. From the standpoint in 
this book, which presents only the “standard” (Copenhagen) interpretation of quantum 
mechanics, we must accept the troublesome questions that lurk at the frontiers of our 
understanding of the physical universe: Just how does a measurement wreak its changes 
on a state function? Do physicists study reality or a self-generated chimera of reality, 
and is there a difference between the two? What powers actually govern what happens 
to an individual member of an ensemble? And on and on and on. These are the great 
unanswered questions of quantum physics. 


ANNOTATED SELECTED READINGS 

The literature of the measurement theory and its implications for the nature of reality is 
vast and fascinating. A recent review that will take you deep into this theory is 

1. Bohm, D., B. J. Hiley, and P. N. Kaloyerou, “An Ontological Basis for the Quantum 

Theory,” Phys. Repts., 144, 321 (1987). 

There are no true textbooks on this subject, but you’ll find a wealth of information 
clearly explained in 

2. d’Espagnat, B., Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics , 2nd ed. (Reading, Mass: 

W. A. Benjamin, 1976). 

Maybe you want something a little less advanced. If so, I strongly encourage you 
to seek out one of the popularizations listed in the Selected Readings for Chap. 2, to 
which I would add 

3. Polkinghome, J. C., The Quantum World (London: Longmann, 1984). 

4. Mermin, N. David, “Quantum Mysteries for Everyone,” Jour. Phil., 78, 397 (1981). 

And, for historical background, 

5. Crease, R. P., and Mann, C. C., The Second Creation: Makers of the Revolution in 20th- 

Century Physics (New York: Macmillan, 1987). 

29 But I don’t want to leave you with the impression that none of the alternative formulations of quantum 
mechanics are viable. Several are. Alternatives to the Copenhagen interpretation include hidden variable 
theories, semiclassical interpretations, the many-worlds interpretation, the advanced-action interpretation, and a 
nonlocal model of reality. The most readable introduction to these interpretations is Quantum Reality: Beyond 
the New Physics by Nick Herbert (New York: Anchor Press, 1985). A useful overview of hidden-variable 
theories is given in A Survey of Hidden-Variables by F. J. Belinfante (New York: Pergamon, 1973). And you 
can find a more advanced, up-to-date discussion of these issues in Open Questions in Quantum Physics , edited 
by G. Tarozzi and A. A. van der Merwe (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel, 1985). Happy reading. 


Annotated Selected Readings 619 



EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS 


It’s a beginning. 

It’s an end. 

I leave to you the problem 
of ordering your perceptions 
and making the journey 
from one to the other. 

—from Empire Star 
by Samuel R. Delaney 


Exercises 

13.1 Interchangeable Measurements. 

Consider two states of a one-dimensional simple harmonic oscillator. The state is a 

superposition of the first two stationary states; the (unnormalized) initial condition for this 
state is 

^i(®,0) = 2ip 0 (x) + 3^i(x). (13.1.1) 

The second state, ty 2 , is the stationary state with energy bhw 0 /2. 

[a] At t = 0 the parity of each state is measured. Draw branch diagrams for each state 
showing the effect on them of M n [fn]. 

[b] A short time after M n [£n], we measure the energy of each sub-ensemble that was created 
,n the ™easurements of part [a]. Complete your branch diagram, showing the effect of 
M£;[f £ ] on each state. 

[c] Suppose that instead of the measurements in [a] and [b], we first measure E, then measure 
H Draw branch diagrams for this case. Discuss the differences (if any) between your 
diagram for this sequence and that of pail [b]. 

Problems 

13.1 Measurements on an Infinite Square Well 

Consider a neutron of mass ra„ in an infinite square well of width L = 15fermi In an 
ensemble energy measurement at t = 0, we find that 1/10 of the members exhibit the value 
2 tt h /m n L and 9/10 exhibit the value 2257r 2 ft 2 /2m„L 2 . 

[a] Write down the wave function of this system prior to the energy measurement 

[b] Draw a branch diagram showing the effect of this measurement on the state. 

[c] Suppose that at t = 0 we measure the parity instead of the energy . What is the probability 
that M„ [t n ] will collapse the state in part [a] into an even-parity eigenstate? .. an odd- 
parity eigenstate? 

[d] Whal is Che mean value of n Iliac would be obtained in Che measurement of pan [cl’ 

[el Do your answers to parts [cl and [d] depend on M n [«nJ? Explain your answer. 

[fj Suppose the ensemble suffers an infinitesimal perturbation at t = 0 causing it to decay to 
the ground stale, emitting a photon in the process. Find the frequencies of the photons 

—that-will be^emitted-by various-members oLthe ensetnbl^— 

13.2 Reviewing Measurement Theory 

Suppose that the initial state of a particle of mass m in a SHO potential is represented by the 
(unnormalized) wave function 

^(.t, 0) = ipi(x) + 4^(x) -f 2ipa(x) - (13.2.1) 

620 Chap. 13 Altered States 



where ^ n (x) is the n th Hamiltonian eigenfunction for the SHO potential. At time f n > 0, 
we perform an ensemble measurement of the parity. A finite time after this measurement, at 
t E , we measure the energy of each sub-ensemble that resulted from M n [*n]- 

[a] Write down an expression for the wave function of the original ensemble for times 
0 < t < in. 

[b] Calculate the average value and uncertainty of the parity for the state in part [a]. 

[c] In Mn[£n], what is the probability that a member of the original ensemble will exhibit 
the eigenvalue -f-1? ... the value -1? 

[d] Consider the sub-ensemble of members that exhibited odd parity. Write down the 
normalized state function of this sub-ensemble for tn < t < t E . 

[e] Now turn to the energy measurement at t E on the sub-ensemble of part [d]. In this 

measurement, will all members exhibit the same value of El Why or why not? 

[f] If your answer to part [e] is yes, give the value of the (sharp) energy of the state. If your 

answer is no, list the values that will be exhibited by various members of the ensemble 

and evaluate the corresponding energy probabilities. 

[g] Will Me^e] of part [e] necessarily change the state of the system? If your answer 
is no, explain why not. If it is yes, write down the wave function(s) after the energy 
measurement. 

13.3 The Final Problem: More Measurements 

A particle of mass m in an infinite square well of width L whose left wall is at x = 0. 
At t = 10 sec, an infinitesimal perturbation causes the particle to emit a photon of (angular) 
frequency u = 3n 2 h/(2mL 2 ). 

[a] From the above information only, a student concludes: “Prior to the photon emission, 
the particle was in the first excited state (n = 2) of the infinite square well.” Critique 
this statement: is it correct? Why or why not? If not, what is the faulty assumption that 
underlies it? 

[b] Suppose we are given the additional information that all members of the ensemble emitted 
a photon of the frequency u> at t = 10 sec. Is this sufficient to draw the above quoted 
conclusion? Explain your answer fully. 

13.4 Measuring a Constant of the Motion 

A particle of mass m with a symmetric potential that supports only bound states is initially 
in a non-stationary state. In terms of the eigenfunctions ip„ (x) of the Hamiltonian of the 
system, this state is the superposition 

#(£,0) = N [3^»i(x) + ipzix) + 2ip.i(x)]. (13.4.1) 

At time t > 0, the parity of this system is measured. 

[a] Does the initial state have definite parity? What is \F(-x, 0)? 

[b] Write down the normalized wave function for t > 0 (before the parity measurement is 
performed). 

[c] Is parity a constant of the motion of this system? 

[d] What is the probability of obtaining the value +1 (even parity) in the parity measurement? 

[e] What is the probability of obtaining -1 (odd parity)? 

Hint: Be careful in working part [e]. For the state (13.4.1) there are two “routes” to the 
odd-parity result. Remember that we add the probabilities for alternate routes to a given 
result. 


Exercises and Problems 621 



Appendixes 


Appendix A SI Units (The International System of Units) 

Appendix B Fundamental Constants in SI (and CGS) Units 

Appendix C Order-of-Magnitude Estimates 

Appendix D Conversion Tables 

Appendix E Prefix Dictionary 

Appendix F A User’s Guide to Atomic Units 

Appendix G The Greek Alphabet 

Appendix H Handy Trigonometric Identities 

Appendix I Integrals You Should Know 

Appendix J Integrals Involving the Gaussian Function 

Appendix K Review of Complex Numbers 

Appendix L The Dirac Delta Function 

Bibliography to the Appendixes 



APPENDIX A 


SI Units (The International System 
of Units) 


THE “BASE UNITS' 


Physical quantity 

SI unit 

Dimension 


Name 

Symbol 


length 

metre 

m 

L 

mass 

kilogram 

kg 

M 

time 

second 

s 

T 

electric current 

ampere 

A 

A 

thermodynamic temperature 

kelvin 

K 


amount of substance 

mole 

mol 



SUPPLEMENTARY UNITS 


Physical quantity 

SI Unit 


Name 

Symbol 




plane angle 
solid angle 

radian 

sterradian 

rad 

sr 


App. A SI Units (The International System of Units) 623 




DERIVED UNITS 


Physical quantity 

SI unit 

Dimension 


Name 

Symbol 

Definition 


electric charge 

coulomb 

C 

s A 

TA 

energy 

joule 

J 

kg m 2 s -2 

ML 2 T ~ 2 

force 

newton 

N 

kg m s -2 

MLT ~ 2 

frequency 

hertz 

Hz 

s -1 

T ~ 1 

pressure 

pascal 

Pa 

kg m -1 s~ 2 

ML~ l T ~ 2 

power 

watt 

W 

kg m 2 s -3 

ML 2 T ~ 3 

electric potential 

volt 

V 

kg m 2 s -3 A -1 

ML 2 T~ 3 A~ l 

magnetic flux 

weber 

Wb 

kg m 2 s“ 2 A -1 

ml 2 t~ 2 a ~ 1 


DERIVED UNITS RELATED TO THE ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD 


Physical quantity 

Symbol for SI Unit 

Dimension 

electric current density j 

A m -2 

l- 2 a 

electric dipole moment 

C m 

LTA 

magnetic dipole moment 

JT" 1 

L 2 A 

electric field strength E 

V m" 1 

MLT~ S A ~ 1 

electric displacement D 

C m -2 

L~ 2 TA 

electric potential <f> 

V 

ml 2 t~ 3 a - 1 

electric charge density p 

Cm" 3 

L~ 3 TA 

magnetic field strength H 

A m _1 

L~ l A 

magnetic flux density B 

T 

MT~ 2 A~ l 

vector potential A 

Tm 

MLT~ 2 A~ x 

permeability /< 

H m -1 

mlt~ 2 a - 1 


Additional Notes 

1 atomic mass unit = 1 a.u. = 1.6605402 x 10 -27 kg 
1 electron volt = leV = 1.602177 x 10~ ,9 J 


624 App. A SI Units (The International System of Units) 





COMMON UNITS AND THEIR DEFINITION IN SI UNITS 


Quantity 

Name 

Symbol 

Definition 

Length 

inch 

in 

0.0254 ni 


foot 

ft 

0.3048 m 

Mass 

slug 

slug 

14.594 kg 

Energy 

British thermal unit 

Btu 

1055.05585252 J 

Temperature 

degree Celsius 

°C 

<[°C) = T[K ] - 273.15 


degree Fahrenheit 

°F 

<[°F] = §T[/C] - 459.67 

Density 

standard density of fluid Hg 

PHg 

13595.1 kg-m~ 3 

Pressure 

standard atmosphere 

atm 

101325 Pa 


torr 

Torr (mm Hg) 

133.322368 Pa 


conventional mm of Hg 

mmHg 

133.322387 Pa 


App. A SI Units (The International System of Units) 625 




APPENDIX B 


Fundamental Constants in §1 
(and CG§) Units 


The values in this table were selected from B. N. Taylor, W. H. Parker, and D. N. 
Langenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 41, 375 (1969), from Reference Data on Atoms, Molecules, 
and Ions by A. A. Radzig and B. M. Smirnov (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1980) and 
from E. R. Cohen and B. N. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys., 59, 1121 (1987). Because of the 
widespread use of CGS units in advanced quantum mechanics courses (and applications), 
I have also given appropriate powers of 10 for these units. 

Note: e 0 = 10 7 /(4 t re 2 ) « 8.854 x lO^F-m" 1 


Quantity 

Symbol 

Mantissa 

CGS exponent 

SI exponent 

Speed of light in vacuum 

c 

2.99792458 

10 10 cm • s -1 

10 8 m-s -1 

Elementary charge 

e 

1.602177 

10 -2 ° e.m.u. 

10“ 19 C 

Planck constant 

h 

6.62607 

10 -27 ergs 

10“ 34 J • s 

Rationalized Planck constant 

h 

1.054573 

10 _27 ergs 

10" 34 J s 

Rydberg constant 

Roo 

1.097373153 

10 5 cm -1 

10 7 m _1 

Fine structure constant 

a 

7.297353 

10" 3 

10“ 3 


1/or 

1.3703599 

10 2 

10 2 

Bohr radius 

ao 

5.2917725 

10 -9 cm 

10“ 11 m 

Electron Compton wavelength 

Ac 

2.4263106 

10 -1 °cm 

10 -12 m 

Classical electron radius 

Te 

2.8179409 

10~ 13 cm 

10 -15 m 


n a 

6.02214 

10 23 mol -1 

10 23 mol" 1 

Atomic Mass Unit 

1 u 

1.66054 

10“ 24 g 

10 -27 kg 

Energy equivalent of 1 u 

E(u) 

1.49243 

10 -3 erg 

10 -1 °J 


626 


App. B Fundamental Constants in SI (and CGS) Units 



Relevant Equations for the Above Table 


floe = 


e 

a= hc 


m c e‘ l 
4n k 3 c 
2 


ao — 


a 


4nR* 

2 


Ac = 


a 

2R Z 

a Ac 


e 2 tt 

lit = lO -3 ^ 1 kg • mol -1 
E(u ) =m u c 2 


Quantity 

Symbol 

Mantissa 

CGS exponent 

SI exponent 

Electron rest mass 

m c 

9.1094 

io- 28 g 

10“ 31 kg 

Proton rest mass 

m p 

1.672623 

10“ 24 g 

10“ 27 kg 



1.0072765 

a.m.u. 

a.m.u. 

Ratio 

m,,/m e 

1.8361527 

10 3 

10 3 

Neutron rest mass 

m„ 

1.674929 

10“ 24 gm 

10“ 27 kg 



1.0086649 

a.m.u. 

a.m.u. 

Permeability of vacuum 

Ho 

1.2566371 

— 

10“ 6 H • m -1 

Permittivity of vacuum 

fo 

8.8541878 

— 

10“ 12 F • m _1 

Gravitational constant 

G 

6.67260 

10“ 8 dyn• cm 2 •g“ 2 

10“ 11 N • m 2 • kg“ 2 

Boltzmann constant 

kn 

1.380658 

10“ 10 erg K" 1 

10“ 23 J K- 1 

Stefan-Boltzmann constant 

<T 

5.67051 

10“ 5 erg s- 1 cm- 2 K“ 4 

T 

1 

N 

1 

E 

£ 

OO 

1 

O 


m fi = 0.511Mey/c 2 
m p = 938.28MeF/c 2 
m„ = 937.57MeK/c 2 


Relevant Equations for the Above Table 


Co 


—1— 

Hoc 2 


7T 2 fc 4 

60 ft 5 ? 


App. B Fundamental Constants in SI (and CGS) Units 627 




APPENDIX C 


Qrder-of-Magnitude Estimates 


Constants 

c = 3 x 10 8 m-s -1 
h = 1(T 34 J-s 
e = 1.6 x 10 -19 C 
R x = 1 x 10 7 m -1 
a = 1/137 
a 0 = 5x 10 -11 m 
m e = lx 10 -31 kg 
Trip = 1 x 10~ 27 kg 
m n = 1.7 x 10 -27 kg 
[Lq — 47T x 10~ 7 H-m -1 
e 0 = 8.8 x 10“ 12 F-m -1 
k D = 1.4 x 10 -23 J-K -1 
k b T room = 0.025 eV 


628 


App. C Order-of-Magnitude Estimates 



APPENDIX D 


Conversion Tables 


Convert from units in the first column to units in the first row by multiplying by the 
conversion factor in the corresponding row-column position, as 

leV = 1.6022 x 10" 19 J 


ENERGY 


Unit 

eV 

J n 

kcal/mol 

cm -1 

1 eV 

1 

1.6022x10" 19 

23.045 

8065.48 

1 J 

6.24I5X10 18 

1 

1.4384x 10 2 ° 

5.0340 xlO 22 

1 kcal/mol 

4.3393X10- 2 

6.9524xl0- 21 

1 

3.4999 xlO 2 

1 cm -1 

1.23985 xl0~ 4 

1.9865x10-23 

2.8574 xlO" 3 

1 

1 K 

8.617 xlO -5 

1.3807xl0“ 23 

I.9859X10- 3 

6.9501x10-* 

1 a.u. 

27.2116 

4.3597x10" 18 

6.2709 xlO 2 

2.1947 xlO 5 

1 Ry 

13.606 

2.1799x10“ 18 

3.1355 xlO 2 

1.0974 x10 s 

1 MHz 

4.I357X10" 9 

6.6262 x 10 -28 

9.5308 xlO" 8 

3.3356X10" 5 


° 1J = 10 7 erg. 


App. D Conversion Tables 629 




Unit 

K 

a.u. 

Ry 

MHz 

1 eV 

11604 

3.6749xl0" 2 

7.3498X10- 2 

2.4180 x10 s 

1 J 

7.2430X10 22 

2.2937 xlO 17 

4.5873xl0 17 

1.5092 xlO 27 

1 kcal/mole 

5.0356xl0 2 

1.5946xl0~ 3 

3.1893x10-° 

1.0492 xlO 7 

1 cm -1 

1.4388 

4.5563x10"° 

9.1127x10-° 

2.9979 xlO 4 

1 K 

1 

3.1688x10"° 

6.3335x10“° 

2.0836 xlO 4 

1 a.u. 

3.1578 x10 s 

1 

2 

6.5797x10° 

1 Ry 

1.5789 x10 s 

0.5 

1 

3.2898x10° 

1 MHz 

4.7993 xlO -5 

1.5I98X10" 10 

3.0397 xlO" 10 

1 


Additional Useful Definitions: 
lHz = Is- 1 
1 MHz = 10 6 Hz 
1 keV = 10 3 eV 
1 MeV = 10 6 eV 


MASS 


Unit 

kg 

g 

u 

1 kg 

1 

1 xlO -3 

6.024 xlO 26 

1 g 

1x10° 

1 

6.024 xlO 23 

1 amu" 

I.660xl0 -27 

1.660xl0 -24 

1 


“ 1 atomic mass unit • c 2 = 1.4924418 x 10 10 J = 931.5016 MeV 


LENGTH 


Unit 

m n 

cm 

mm 

A 

A 

f 

1 m (meter) 

1 

10 2 

10° 

10° 

10*° 

10 15 

1 cm (centimeter) 

10- 2 

1 

10 

10 4 

10 s 

10 13 

1 mm (millimeter) 

10“ 3 

io-* 

1 

10° 

10 7 

10 12 

1 (i (micron) 

10-° 

10- 4 

10" 3 

1 

10 4 

10° 

1 A(Angslrom) 

10-*° 

10" s 

10- 7 

10~ 4 

1 

10 s 


in-15 

10 -13 

10 -12 

10“° 

10 -5 

1 

i I tvermt; 








n linch = 2.540 x 10 _2 m 


630 


App. D Conversion Tables 























APPENDIX E 


Prefix Dictionary 


The names of multiples and submultiples of the units are formed with the following 
prefixes: 


Factor by 

which unit 

is multiplied 

Prefix 

Symbol 

Factor by 

which unit 

is multiplied 

Prefix 

Symbol 

10 18 

exa 

E 

to- 1 

deci 

d 

10 15 

pecta 

P 

10" 2 

centi 

c 

10 12 

tera 

T 

10” 3 

milli 

m 

10° 

giga 

G 

10“ 6 

micro 

/< 

to 6 

mega 

M 

10“ 9 

nano 

n 

10 3 

kilo 

k 

10- 12 

pico 

P 

10 2 

hecto 

h 

10" 15 

femto 

f 

10 

deca 

da 

10-18 

atto 

a 


632 App. E Prefix Dictionary 



APPENDIX F 


A User's Guide to Atomic Units 


Introduction 


In atomic units, the following quantities are arbitrarily set equal to 1.0: m e (the rest 
mass of the electron), h (Planck’s constant divided by 2n), e (the elementary charge), 
and do (the first Bohr radius of the hydrogen atom). The resulting unit of energy is the 
Hartree E/,: 

in e 4 

E h = 775 — = 27.211 eV = 4.359748 x 10~ 18 J 
h 

Confusingly, results are often reported in another energy unit, the Rydberg 

1 Ry = \E h = 13.605804 eV 

Summary of Energy Conversions to Atomic Units 

1 eV = 3.674931 • 10~ 2 Hartree = 1.6021773 • 10“ 19 J 
1 Rydberg = \ Hartree = 13.6058 eV = 2.179907 • 10~ 18 J 
1 Hartree = 2 Rydberg = 27.2114 eV = 4.359748 • 10~ 18 J 

Conversion to Wavenumbers 

k = j, where A is the wavelength: 

1 Hartree = 2.194746 • 10 5 cm" 1 
1 Rydberg = 1.097373 • 10 5 cm" 1 

1 cm -1 = 4.556335 • 10" 6 Hartree = 9.112672 ■ 10" 6 Rydberg 


App. F A User’s Guide to Atomic Units 


633 



TABLE F.1 DEFINITION OF THE ATOMIC UNITS OF FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICAL QUANTITIES 
AND THEIR VALUES IN SI UNITS. 


Unit and Significance 

Symbol and/or Definition 

Value 

charge 

(charge on electron) 

e 

1.60218 x 10" 19 C 

mass 

(electron rest mass) 

nip. 

9.10939 x 10~ 31 kg 

angular momentum 

h 

1.05457 x I0- 3 ' 1 J • s 

length 

(first Bohr radius in H) 

a 0 = h 2 /m e e 2 

0.52918 x 10 _lo m = 0.52918 A 

energy 

(twice the ionization 
potential of H with m n = oo) 

M 

-1* 

V 

A) 

II 

27.2116 eV = 4.35975 x 10~ 18 J 

velocity 

(electron speed in 
first Bohr orbit) 

v e = e 2 /h 

2.18769 x I0 6 m • s~ l 

momentum 

(of electron in first 

Bohr orbit) 

p e = m e e 2 /k 

1.992888 x 10" 24 kg ■ m • s~ l 

wavenumber 

A e = « 0 1 

1.88973 x I0 10 m- 1 

time 

(electron transit 
of first Bohr orbit) 

tc = h 3 /m e e 4 

2.41889 x 10~ 17 s 

frequency 

We = V e /ao 

4.134136 x 10 1G Hz 

cross section 


2.800 x 10" 21 m 2 



8.79735 x I0“ 21 m 2 

polarizability 

4 

1.48187 x 10- 31 m 3 

current density 

je = m 3 e°/h 7 

3.62517 x 10- 2G m 2 • s" 1 

dipole moment 

D = eao 

8.47842 x 10~ 3 C • m = 2.5418 D(Debye) 

magnetic moment 

p e = h 2 /m c e 

7.6200 x 10- 20 J/T 


634 


App. F A User’s Guide to Atomic Units 



TABLE F.2 VALUES OF OMNIPRESENT PHYSICAL QUANTITIES EXPRESSED 
IN ATOMIC UNITS. 


Quantity 

Symbol 

Value in atomic units 

Electron mass 

m c 

1 

Proton mass 

m p 

1835.15152 

Neutron mass 

m n 

1838.6827 

Speed of light 

c 

1/a = 137.03604 

Rydberg constant 

R x 

o/4tt = 5.807047 • 10~ 4 

Boltzmann constant 

h’B 

3.1667908 ■ 10" G 


Note: In this table, a = 7.2973531 x 10 3 is the 
(dimensionless) fine-structure constant: a = e 2 /he 


App. F A User’s Guide to Atomic Units 635 




APPENDIX G 

The Greek Alphabet 


A, a 

Alpha 

B, (3 

Beta 

r,7 

Gamma 

A, 6 

Delta 

E, e 

Epsilon 

z, C 

Zeta 

H, T] 

Eta 

0,0 

Theta 

I, i 

Iota 

K, K 

Kappa 

A, A 

Lambda 

M, \i 

Mu 


N, v 

Nu 

3,£ 

Xi 

0 , o 

Omicron 

n,7r 

Pi 

p.p 

Rho 

E, 

Sigma 

T, r 

Tau 


Upsilon 


Phi 

X.X 

Chi 


Psi 

Q,CJ 

Omega 


636 App. G The Greek Alphabet 



APPENDIX H 

Handy Trigonometric identities 


1 rad = — = 57.296° 

7T 

1° = — = 0.17453 rad 
180 

Values of sine and cosine for multiples of n 

sinn7r = 0 n = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ... 

COS717T = (—1)" 

cos¥ = A(0"[l+ (-!)“] 

sin '-f - 0 n = 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, ... 4m (m = integer) 

sin »UL - (_!)*("-*) n = 2, 6, 10, 14, 18,... 4m + 2 (m = integer) 

sin m . = -l=(-l) 50 * 2 + 4 »+ 11 ) n = i, 3, 5, 7, ... 

Sums and differences of angles 


a = 

90 ° ±3 

180° ± (3 

270° ± 3 

360° ± 3 

sin a = 

+ cos (3 

^ sin / 3 

— cos 3 

± sin 3 

cos a = 

sin (3 

— cos (3 

± sin 3 

+ cos 3 






tana = 

^ cot (3 

dbtan (3 

^ cot 3 

± tan 3 

cot a = 

^ tan (3 

± cot (3 

^ tan 3 

cot 3 


App. H Handy Trigonometric Identities 637 



Exponential definition of trigonometric functions 


S ' 110 = 2 i ^ ~ e '° = c °s0 + ism0 


cos 0 = - (e'® + e _i ®) e~'® = cos 0 - i sin 0 

Fundamental Trigonometric Relations Involving Only One Angle 

sin 2 a + cos 2 a = 1 sec 2 a - tan 2 a = 1 cosec 2 a - cot 2 a = 1 

sin a • cosec a = 1, cosa seca=l, tan a • cot a; = 1 


sin a = \/l — cos 2 a = 


tana 


cos a = \/l - sin 2 a = 
tan a = y /sec 2 a — 1 = 


cot a = \/cosec 2 a — 1 = 


\/l + tan 2 a 

\/l + cot 2 a 

cot a 

1 

\/l -h cot 2 a 

Vl + tan 2 a 

sin a 

1 

\/l — sin 2 a 

\/cosec 2 a — 1 

cos a 

1 


\/l — cos 2 a \/sec 2 a — 1 


, v 1 + tan a 

tan( “ + 5) = rrr^ 

cot(f -/3) = E2L|±1 
u ; cot - 1 


sin 2a = 2 sin a cos a 

cos 2a = cos 2 a - sin 2 a 
2 tan a 


tan 2a = 


cot 2a = 


1 — tan 2 a 
cot 2 a - 1 


638 App. H 


2 cot a 
sin 3a = 3 sin a - 4 sin 3 a 
cos 3a = 4 cos 3 a - 3 cos a 
Handy Trigonometric Identities 



a 

tan - = 


a 

cot — = 
2 


. Oi 

sin — = 
2 

a 

c°s- = 


1 — cos a 


1 + cos a 


1 — cos a 1 — cos a sin a 
1 + cos a sin a 1 + cos a 


1 + cos a 1 + cos a sin a 


1 — cos a sin a 1 — cos a 


sin 2 a = |(1 — cos 2a), 
cos 2 a = ^(1 + cos 2a) 


sin 3 a = | (3 sin a - sin 3a) 


cos 3 a = t (cos 3a + 3 cos a) 


Fundamental Trigonometric Relations Involving Two or More Angles 


sin a ± sin /? = 2 sin | (a ± /?) cos ^ (a ^ /?) 
cos a + cos P = 2 cos | (a + P) cos | (a — P) 
cos a — cos P = —2 sin ^(a + P) sin |(a — P) 
sin(a ± P) 


tan a ± tan P = 


cos a cos P 


„ ±sin (a±/?) 
cot a ± cot P = —;—— : —~~ 
sin a sin p 

sin 2 a - sin 2 P = sin(a + p) • sin(a - p) 

cos 2 a - cos 2 P = — sin(a + p) • sin(a - P) 

cos 2 a — sin 2 P = cos(a + P) • cos(a — P) 

sin a ± sin P u 

-- = tan M a ± /?) 

cos a + cos p * 

sin a + sin P _ tan^(a + /?) 
sin a-sin/? tan |(a-/?) 


App. H Handy Trigonometric Identities 639 



p |0M 


sin a ± sin /3 
cos a — cos P 


- cot \ {oc±P) 


sin (a ± p) = sin a cos p ± cos a sin p 
cos(a ± P) = cos a cos p =F sin a sin p 


tan(a ± P) = 


tan a ± tan P 
1 ^ tan a tan p 


cot(a ± p) 


cot a cot P- pi 
cot p ± cot a 


sin(a + p + 7 ) = sin a cos p cos 7 + cos a sin P cos 7 
+ cos a cos p sin 7 — sin a sin p sin 7 


cos(a + P + 7 ) = cos a cos /?COS 7 - sin a sin p cos 7 
— sin a cos p sin 7 — cos a sin P sin 7 

sin a sin P = ^ [cos(a - P) - cos(a + p)\ 

cos a cos P = \ [cos(a — p) + cos(o! + P)\ 

sin a cos P = \ [sin (a - P) + sin(c»! + P)\ 

sin a sin P sin 7 = ^ [sin(a + P — 7) + sin(/? + 7 — a) + sin (7 + a - P) — sin(a + P + 7)] 

sin a cos p cos 7 = |[sin(a + P - 7) - sin(/? + 7 - a) + sin (7 + a - p) + sin(a 4- P + 7 )] 

sinasin/?cos 7 = ^[— cos(a+P~ 7 )+cos (/?+7 — a) + cos( 7 +a — P) — cos(a+/?+ 7 )] 
cos a cos p cos 7 = ^[cos(o; + /? — 7 ) + cos(/? + 7 — a)+ cos (7 + a — /?) + cos(a + /? + 7 )] 


Hyperbolic Functions 




e" — e“" , e" + e“ 

sinh u =--- cosh u =--- 

e" — e“" , e" + e _ " 

tanh w = —-- coth u = 


-csdrw =~= 


e" + c“” 

1 


e" - e~" 

1 


, —sech u = 

sinh w cosh u 


coth u = 


1 


tanh u 

sinh(— u) = — sinhu odd function 


640 App. H Handy Trigonometric Identities 



cosh(— u) = coshu even function 

tanh(— u) = — tanhu odd function 
tanh(— u) = — cothu odd function 


Fundamental Relations Involving One Angle 


sinh u = 


cosech u = 


tanh u 
sech u 

sech u 


cosh u = 


sech u — 


cothu 
cosech u 

cosech u 


tanh u = 


tanh u 
sinh u = tanh u cosh u 

tanh u = sinh u sech u 
sech u = cosech u tanh u 
cosh 2 u — sinh 2 u = 1 


coth u = 


sinh-u 

cosh-w 

coshw 


coth sinh u 

cosh u = coth u sinh u 

coth u = cosh u cosech u 
cosech u = sech u coth u 
tanh 2 u + sech 2 u = 1 


coth 2 u — csch 2 u = 1 
csch 2 u - sech 2 u = csch 2 u sech 2 u 


Fundamental Relations Involving Two or More Angles 

sinh(w + v) = sinh u cosh v + cosh u sinh v 
sinh(u — v) = sinh u cosh v — cosh u sinh v 
cosh(w + v) = cosh u cosh v + sinh u sinh v 
cosh(u — v) = cosh u cosh v — sinh u sinh v 


Multiples of One Angle 


. , _ _ . , , 2tanh u 

sinh 2u = 2 sinh u cosh u = - 2 ~ 

1 — tanh u 


cosh 2«—cosh-'a-h sinh 2 w = 2 cosh 2 u — \— 


= 1 + 2 sinh 2 u = 


1 + tanh 2 u 
1 — tanh 2 u 


tanh 2 u = 


2 tanh u 
1 + tanh 2 u 


coth 2 u = 


coth 2 u + 1 
2 coth u 


App. H Handy Trigonometric Identities 641 



sinh u + sinh v = 2 sinh - (u + v) cosh - (u - v) 
z z 

sinh u - sinh v = 2 cosh i (u + v) sinh ^ (u - v) 

Z Z 

cosh u + cosh = 2 cosh ^ (it + v) cosh ~{u — v) 
z z 

cosh u - cosh v = 2 sinh ^ (u + v) sinh i (w - v) 
z z 


sinh u cosh v = ^ sinh(u -f v) + ^ sinh(u - v ) 
z z 

cosh u sinh v = J sinh(u + u) - ^ sinh(u - v) 
z z 

cosh u cosh v = - cosh(-n + v) + - cosh(u — v ) 
z z 

sinh u sinh v = ^ cosh(u + v) — ^ cosh(u - v) 
z z 

sinh 2 u = i (cosh 2u — 1) 


cosh 2 u = ^ (cosh 2u + 1) 


(cosh u + sinh w)" = cosh nu + sinh nu 


Relations Between Hyperbolic and Trigonometric Functions 


sinh iu = i sin u, sinh u = —i sin iu 
cosh iu = cos "U, cosh u = cos iu 


tanh iu = i tan u, tanh u = —i tan iu 

Every hyperbolic relation may be obtained from the corresponding trigonometric relation 
by replacing sin a by isinhu and cos a by coshw. 


642 


App. H Handy Trigonometric Identities 



APPENDIX I 


integrals You Should ECnow 


Indefinite Integrals 


/ x sin bx dx = i sin bx — ^ cos bx 
b 1 b 

j xe bx dx = ~ 1) 


sV^ = e -(£-£ + A 


J)X 


[ x n e nx dx = - - f x n ~ l e ax dx 

J a a J 

J sin x dx = — cos x 
/ sm — i 

J a 


-dx = —a cos — 
a 


x sin x dx = sin re — x cos x 


J x 2 sin x dx = 2x sin x — (x 2 — 2) cos x 


J 


sin 2 x dx — — — 


x sin 2x 


x 

2 


sin x cos x 


J 


• 2 j x 

x sin xdx = —— 


2 x sin 2x cos 2x 


8 


App. I Integrals You Should Know 



CUS X 

sin a; dx = —--cos x 

o 


x cos x dx = cos x + x sin x 


J x 2 cos x dx = 2x cos x + (x 2 — 2) sin x 


. 2 x sin 2x x sin x cos x 

cos xdx = - + - T - = 2 +-2- 


/* 


x 2 x sin 2a; cos 2x 

cos x dx = — 4---1--— 

4 4 8 


i- 


2 cos 2 '*• /1 '" — 


x s (x 2 1 \ . x cos 2x 


xdx — — +[ — --) sin 2a; + 


6 V 4 8 


cos 3 x dx = sin x — 


sin 3 x 


x sin 3a; cos 3a; 3 3 

x cos 3 x dx = ——— + 36 + -a;sin a; + - cosa; 


sin x cos 2 x dx = - - 


sin 2 x cos x dx = 


sin 3 x 


/■ 


tan 2 a; da; = tan a; — a; 


cot 2 x dx = — cot x — x 


/ 


x 2 e" r dx = e ar 


x 2 2x 2 
a a 2 a 3 


Integrals from 0 to oo [for a > 07 




e "' ’ da; = i 

2 V a 


644 


App. I Integrals You Should Know 



xe nx dx = — 
2 a 


x 2 e~ UJ dx=-J-= 


x 3 e~ (,x dx = 




[« = 1,2,3,...] 


j\^e-^dx =^t [« = 0 , 1 , 2 ,...] 


f* dx 1 • 3 • 5 • • ■ (2n - 3) 7T f n _ n 0 
J Q (a 2 + a; 2 )" “ 2-4-6-••(2n-2)2a 2 »- 1 ’ l a> °; n - 2 ’ d ’- 


e n r cos mx dx = 


a* + m 2 


Integrals from 1 to oo [for a > 07 


e~ ,u 'dx = 


xe nx dx = -z- (1 + a) 
a 2 


x * e -«* dx= ^Z( 1+a+ ?L 


Integrals from -1 to +1 


f + ! 1 

e - ( " dx=- (e° — e~ <l ) 
a v 


r +1 I 

J xe~ or dx = — [e" — e“" - a (e" + e - ")] 
J +> x" e-"dx = (—1)" +I j 4„(—a) - ,4„(a) 


App. I Integrals You Should Know 645 



where 


Jo a k=Q K - 


c 


+ i j 0 n= 1,3,5,... 

x"dx= l 2 

to = 0 , 2 , 4 ,... 


TO + 1 


Integrals from 0 to 1 [for a > 0] 


r l i 

/ x e~" v dx = —z [l — e - " (1 + a)] 
Jo a 

r l l 

/ e~ ax dx = - (l — e~ a ) 

Jo a 




1 2 
x 2 e~ ax dx = —.r 


1 — e n ( 1 + cl 4——* 


Integrals from 0 to 7t/2 


/>7r/ 2 rwf 2 ^ 

/ sin 2 mx'(/x= / cos 2 mrc rfa; = — [m = l,2,...] 
Jo jo 4 


Integrals from 0 ton [m and n non-zero integers] 


f” sin 2 

Jo 

ft 


xdx = I cos 2 xdx =- 


T 0 [m/n] 

sin rrox sin too; dx = < 7r . , 

{ 2 l m = n J 


T 0 [m ^ to] 
cos mx cos nx dx = < 7r r . 
o 77 [™ = rc] 


0 

sin ms cos nx dx = l ^ 

Jo I 2m 


TOl 2 - TO 2 


[m = to] 

[m ± to; (m + to) even] 
[m -f- to; (m + to) odd] 


646 


App. I Integrals You Should Know 



Still More Integrals [for a > 0] 


S'-- 

J y 


n\e ny ^ ( ay) k 

e "*dx = —[„ = 0,1,2,...] 


a 


»+i 


k -=o 


+ + + [* = 0 , 1 , 2 ,...] 

r‘2n p'27r 

/ sin 2 mx dx = / cos 2 mx dx = 7r, [m = 1,2,...] 

J o Jo 


App. I 


Integrals You Should Know 647 



APPENDIX J 

integrals involving the Gaussian 
Function 


General Results 



648 


App. J Integrals Involving the Gaussian Function 





«-H / 


Specific Results 


/„ = £e- , ''^ rf x=^|I 



r x 2 dx=^(a + ib )~ 3/2 

J-OC ^ 

e -nT*-H js fa _ /£ e /) s /(4n) ) 


xe - a *-‘-Ks dx = _]l 

2 a a 


„2„- l ,,‘- l U dx= I 1 . 


.t e 


2a + 4a 2 J V 



-e^ 


/( 4 «) 


App. J 


Integrals Involving the Gaussian Function 649 



APPENDIX K 


(Review of Complex Numbers 


i = \f —1 


Real and Imaginary Parts 

If z = x + iy, then x = 5R(z) and y = 3(-z). 

Polar Representation of a Complex Number 

If we plot x = 3?(z) and y = 3(z), then we can represent 2 : by the polar coordinates 
and 0, where 

r = \z\ = distance of the point 2 : from the origin (“modulus” of z) 

0 = tan -1 - = angle that the vector to 2 : makes with the x axis 
x 

The following relationships hold: 

x = r cos 0 \z\—r= \/x 2 + y 2 

y = rsm9 z = re' 0 = r (cos 6 + isin0) 

All About the Complex Conjugate 

If z = x + iy, then z* = x - iy 

If A is an operator, then (A^)* = 

A real number is one that is equal to its complex conjugate, i.e., 

z real => z = z* 

650 App. K Review of Complex Numbers 



de Moivre’s Theorem 


[r(cos0 + isin0)]" = r n (cos nO + ismnO) 

Simple Algebra Involving Complex Numbers 

If zi = xi + iy\ and z 2 = x 2 + iy 2 , then 

zi + z 2 = (zi + x 2 ) + i(y\ + y 2 ) 
z\ • z 2 = (x\X 2 - 2/12/2) + i (y\X 2 + Xiy 2 ) 
z± _ xix 2 + yiy 2 . yix 2 - x Y y 2 

zi A + vl 1 A + vl 

Multiples of i 

i 2 — - 1, i 3 = -i, i 4 = +1, i 5 = ii 4 =i, i 6 = ii 5 = i 2 = -1 
i 4 " = 1, i 4n+l = i } i 4n+ 2 = -1, i 4n+k = i k 
1/z = - i , 1 fi 2 = i 2 = -1, 1 A 3 = 1 /ii 2 = -1 /i = i 


App. K Review of Complex Numbers 651 



APPENDIX L 


The Dirac Delta Function 


Basic Properties 


Definition 

[ 8(x - x n )f{x) dx = f{x 0 ) 

J --x. 


Nature 

( 0 

6(x - rc 0 ) = < 

f 00 

x ± x 0 

x = x 0 

Normalization 

/ <5(rc — rco) dx = 1 

J -OC 


<5 (re) is real 

6*{x) = 6{x) 


<5(rc) is even 

6(x) = 5(-re) 



Additional Properties 

6(ax) = -S(x) for a > 0 
a 

j 6'{x)f{x) dx = -/'(0), where 6’(x) = ^<5(rc) 

— 6 l f=x) = -6 f (x) 
x6{x) = 0 

<5 (re 2 - a 2 ) = -^[<5(rc ~ a ) + 6(rc + a)] for a > 0 

652 App. L The Dirac Delta Function 





f(x)6(x -a) = f{a)S(x - a) 


J 6(x - b)6(a - x) dx = 6(a - b) 



d"'S(x) 

dx m 


f(x)dx = (-!)'" 


d'"f 


dx h 


J .r=() 


«[/(*)] 


1 

\df/dx |, T= ,,, 


3^o)i 


rco = a root of f(x) 


Representations 


6(x) = lim 

n—>oc 



[normalized Gaussian of width (2a) ’^ 2 


6(x) — lim — 


< —0 7T X 2 


e 



[Fourier transform of l/\/27r] 


«(x) = ]im l!!^M 

« —» 7T X 


[diffraction amplitude of width oc 1/a] 


“£*<*> 


where 9(x) is the step function, defined by 


8(x) = 


0 x < 0 
1 x > 0 


x 1 

Six — x) — > —=-- 7 exp 

V ' , \Jii 2 " n! 

//=o v 


X 2 + x' 2 


H n (x)H n (x') 


where H„(x) is the n ,ll -order Hermite Polynomial. 

1 

S(x - x') = — / cos k(x — x 1 ) dk 

n Ju 


-1—- 

6 (a; — x r ) = — } exp[m(rc - re')] 

Z7T Z ' 


6(x - x') 


1 

27T 


OG 

1 + ^ 2 cos n{x — x') 
\ 


App. L The Dirac Delta Function 


653 



6 (x — x') = lim 


o -( Jr _ a .')2/ f 2 


(» Cy/n 
8(x — x') = — lim 


7T e—o (rc — x') 2 + e 2 


*o-£+iX>(==) 


H = 1 


Fourier series for region +L to — L 


654 


App. L The Dirac Delta Function 



Bibliography to the Appendixes 


1. Taylor, B. N., W. H. Parker, and D. N. Langenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys ., 41, 375 
(1969). 

2. Radzig, A. A., and B. M. Smirnov, Reference Data on Atoms, Molecules, and Ions 
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 1980). 

3. The Symbols Committee of the Royal Society, Quantities, Units, and Symbols 
(London: The Royal Society, 1971). 

4. McGlaschan, M. L., Physico-Chemical Quantities and Units , 2nd ed., (London: 
The Royal Institute for Chemistry, 1971). 

5. Saxon, David S., Elementary Quantum Mechanics (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 
1968). 

6. Dwight, H. B. Tables of Integrals and Other Mathematical Data , 4th ed. (New 
York: Macmillan, 1961). 

7. Fischbeck, H. J., and K. H. Fischbeck, Formulas, Facts, and Constants for Stu¬ 
dents and Professionals in Engineering, Chemistry, and Physics (London: Springer- 
Verlag, 1982). 


App. L Bibliography to the Appendixes 655 



Bibliography 


I used the following books extensively during the writing of this text; they afforded a 
continual source of insights, problem ideas, and guidance. All are recommended to the 
serious student of quantum physics. Additional, more specialized references appear in 
the footnotes and in the Suggested Readings lists at the end of most chapters. 

Alonso, M. and H. Valk, Quantum Mechanics: Principles and Applications (Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley, 1972). 

Amaldi, G., The Nature of Matter: Physical Theory from Thales to Fermi (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1966). 

Anderson, E. E., Modern Physics and Quantum Mechanics (Philadelphia: Saunders, 1971). 

Audi, M., The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973). 
Baym, G., Lectures on Quantum Mechanics (New York: W. A. Benjamin, 1969). 

Beard, D. B. and G. B. Beard, Quantum Mechanics With Applications (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 
1970). 

Belinfante, F. J., Measurement and Time Reversal in Objective Quantum Theory (New York: Perg- 
amon, 1975). 

Bethe, H. and R. W. Jackiw, Intermeditate Quantum Mehcanics (New York: Benjamin, 1968). 
Blokhintsev, D. L., Quantum Mechanics (Dordrecht, West Germany: D. Reidel, 1964). 

Bockhoff, F. J., Elements of Quantum Theory, 2nd ed. (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1976). 
Bohm, A., Quantum Mechanics: Foundations and Applications, 2nd ed., (New York: Springer- 
Verlag, 1986). 

Bohm, D., Quantum Theory (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1953). 

Bohm, D., Causality and Chance in Modern Physics (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1957). 

Borowitz, S., Fundamentals of Quantum Mechanics (New York: Benjamin, 1967). 

Boorse, H7“A“ and ErMotzredsT,Ty/^VVb77r/7)/7//c Awm (New York: Basic Books, 1963):— 
Brandt, S. and H. D. Dahmen, The Picture Book of Quantum Mechanics (New York: John Wiley, 
1985). 

Cartwright, N., How The Laws of Physics Lie (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). 

Clark, H., A First Course hi Quantum Mechanics, rev. ed. (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1982). 


656 Bibliography 


Cohen-Tannoudji, C., B. Diu, and F. Laloe, Quantum Mechanics, Volumes I and II (New York: 
Wiley-Interscience, 1977). 

Cropper, W. H., The Quantum Physicists and an Introduction to Their Physics (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1970). 

Das, A. and A. C. Melissinos, Quantum Mechanics: A Modern Introduction (New York: Gordon 
and Breach, 1986). 

Davis, P. C. W. and J. R. Brown, eds.. The Ghost in the Atom (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1986). 

Davydov, A. S., Quantum Mechanics , translated, edited and with additions by D. Ter Haar (Oxford: 
Pergamon Press, 1965). 

d’Espagnat, B., Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics , 2nd ed. (Reading, Mass: W. A. 
Benjamin, 1976). 

Dicke, R. H. and J. P. Wittke, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (Reading, Mass.: Addison- 
Wesley, 1960). 

Diner, S., S. Fargue, G. Lochak, and F. Selleri, eds., The Wave-Particle Dualism: A Tribute to 
Louis de Broglie on his 90th Birthday (Boston: D. Reidel, 1984). 

Dirac, P. A. M., The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed., (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1958). 

Eisberg, R. M., Fundamentals of Modern Physics (New York: Wiley, 1961). 

Eisele, J. A., Modern Quantum Mechanics with Applications to Elementary Particle Physics: An 
Introduction to Contemporary Physical Thinking (New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1969). 

Eisberg, R. M. and R. Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles, 
3rd ed. (New York: Wiley, 1985). 

Eyring, H., J. Walder, and G. E. Kimball, Quantum Chemistry (New York: Wiley, 1944). 

Fano, G., Mathematical Methods of Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971). 

Fermi, E., Notes on Quantum Mechanics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972). 

Feynman, R. P., The Character of Physical Law (Cambridge, Mass.: M. I. T. Press, 1965). 

Feynman, R. P., R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Vol. Ill: Quantum 
Mechanics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1965). 

FlUgge, S., Practical Quantum Mechanics, I and II (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1971). 

Fong, P., Elementary Quantum Mechanics (Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1960). 

French, A. P. and E. F. Taylor, An Introduction to Quantum Physics (New York: Norton, 1978). 

Gasiorowicz, S., Quantum Physics (New York: Wiley, 1974). 

Gillespie, D. T., A Quantum Mechanics Primer (London: International Textbook, 1973). 

Gottfried, K., Quantum Mechanics, Volume I (Reading, Mass.: Benjamin/Cummings, 1966). 

Green, H. S., Matrix Mechanics (The Netherlands: P. Noordhoff, Ltd., 1965). 

Hameka, H. F., Quantum Mechanics (New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1981). 

Harris, L. and A. L. Loeb, Introduction to Wave Mechanics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963). 

Herbert, N., Quantum Reality: Behind the New Physics (New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1985). 

Hey, T., and P. Walters, The Quantum Univese (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). 

Houston, W. V. and G. C. Phillips, Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 
1973). 

Ikenberry, E., Quantum Mechanics for Scientists and Engineers (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1962). 

Jackson, J. D., Mathematics for Quantum Mechanics (New York: W. A. Benjamin, Inc., 1962). 

Jammer, M., The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1966). 

Jammer, M., The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (New York: Wiley, 1974). 


Bibliography 657 



Jauch, J. M., Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1968). 

Jordan, T. F., Linear Operators for Quantum Mechanics (New York: Wiley, 1969). 

Kompaneyetz, A. S., Basic Concepts in Quantum Mechanics (New York: Reinhold Publishing 
Corp. 1966). 

Kramers, H. A., Quantum Mechanics (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1958). 

Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, Nonrelativistic Theory (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 
1965). 

Landshoff, P. and Metherell, A., Simple Quantum Physics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1979). 

Lawden, D. F., The Mathematical Principles of Quantum Mechanics (London: Methuen, 1967). 
Leighton, R. B., Principles of Modern Physics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959). 

Levine, I. N., Quantum Chemistry 3rd ed. (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1983). 

Liboff, R. L., Introductory Quantum Mechanics (San Fransisco: Holden-Day, 1980). 

Lowe, J. P., Quantum Chemistry (New York: Academic Press, 1978). 

Ludwig, G., ed., Wave Mechanics (New York: Pergamon, 1968). 

McGervey, J. D., Introduction to Modern Physics, 2nd ed. (New York: Academic Press, 1983). 
Mandel, F., Quantum Mechanics , 2nd ed. (London: Butterworths, 1957). 

Margenau, H„ The Nature of Physical Reality: A Philosophy of Modern Physics (Woodbridge, 
Conn.: Ox Bow Press, 1977). 

Martin, J. L M Basic Quantum Mechanics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983). 

Massey, H. S. W., Atomic and Molecular Collisions (London: Taylor and Francis Ltd., 1979). 
Mathews, P. T., Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963). 

Mehra, J. and H. Rechenberg, The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, Volumes i-III (New 
York: Springer-Verlag, 1982). 

Merzbacher, E., Quantum Mechanics 2nd ed. (New York: Wiley, 1980). 

Messiah, A., Quantum Mechanics, Volumes I and II (New York: Wiley, 1966). 

Morrison, M. A., T. L. Estle, and N. F. Lane, Quantum States of Atoms, Molecules, and Solids, 
(Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1976). 

Mott, N. F. and I. N. Sneddon, Wave Mechanics audits Applications, (New York: Dover, 1963). 
Park, D., Introduction to the Quantum Theory, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1974). 

Pauli, W., General Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1980). 

Pauling, L. and E. B. Wilson, Jr., Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1935). 

Powell, J. L. and B. Crasemann, Quantum Mechanics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1961). 
Price, W. C. and S. S. Chissick, eds., The Uncertainty Principle and the Foundations of Quantum 
Mechanics (New York, Wiley: 1977). 

Rae, A. I. M., Quantum Mechanics (New York: Halsted, 1981). 

Rapp, D., Quantum Mechanics (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971). 

Reif, F., Statistical Physics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965). 

Richtmeyer, F. K., E. H. Kennard, and J. N. Cooper, Introduction to Modern Physics, 6th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1969). 

Rojansky, V., Introductory Quantum Mechanics (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1938). 
Rubinowicz, A., Quantum Mechanics (New York: Elsevier, 1968). 

Sakuri, J. J., Modern Quantum Mechanics, edited by S. F. Tuan (Reading, Mass.: Benjamin/Cummings: 
1985). 

Saxon, D. S., Elementary Quantum Mechanics (San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1968). 


658 Bibliography 



Schiff, L. I., Quantum Mechanics , 3rd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969). 

Schrodinger. E., Four Lectures on Wave Mechanics (London: Blackie and Sons, 1928). 

Shankar, R., Principles of Quantum Mechanics (New York: Plenum, 1980). 

Sposito, G., An Introduction to Quantum Physics (New York: Wiley, 1970). 

Sproull, R. L. and W. A. Phillips, Modern Physics: The Quantum Physics of Atoms, Solids, and 
Nuclei , 3rd ed. (New York: Wiley, 1980). 

Strauss, H. L., Quantum Mechanics: An Introduction (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice Hall, 1968). 
Sudbery, A., Quantum Mechanics and the Particles of Nature: An Outline for Mathematicians 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986). 
ter Haar, D., ed.. Selected Problems in Quantum Mechanics (London: Infosearch, 1964). 
Tomonaga, S. I., Quantum Mechanics, Volumes I and II (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1966). 
von Neumann, J., Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton, N. J. : Princeton 
University Press, 1955). 

Weider, S., The Foundations of Quantum Theory (New York: Academic Press, 1973). 

Wheaton, B. R., The Tiger and the Shark: Empirical Roots of Wave-Particle Dualism (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1983). 

Wichamnn, E. H., Quantum Physics , Berkley Physics Course, Vol. 4 (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1971). 

Winter, R. G., Quantum Physics, (Belmont, Ca.: Wadsworth, 1979). 

Yariv, A., An Introduction to Theory and Applications of Quantum Mechanics (New York: Wiley, 
1982). 

Ziock, K., Basic Quantum Mechanics (New York: Wiley, 1969). 


Bibliography 659 



Index 


Absolute energy probabilities. 609 
Absolute probability. 63. 65 
Action function, classical. 183 
Adjoint. 455-57 
properties table. 457 
Advanced-action interpretation. 6l9r 
Airplane, oscillations of. 433p 
Airy. G. B.. 417 
Airy equation. 417-19. 427p 
graphs of, 418 
zeros, 418 
zeros table. 419 
Algebra of probabilities. 63 
Alkali atoms. 345 
Alpha particle emission. 312 
Antaldi. Ginesira, 148 
Ammonia beam maser. 312 
Ammonia molecule. 312 
Amplitude: 

of Hamiltonian eigenfunction. 369 
of SHO. 375 

Amplitude, scattering. 318 
Amplitude function. 110 
for a Gaussian. 123 
normalization of. 121 
Amplitude variation. 368 
Analogies in quantum physics. 181. 216. 

221. 472 

Anderson. C. D.. 50 
Angular frequency. 48. 102. 375 

-Angular-momentum:- 

classical. 147 
conservation of. 50p 
uncertainty relation. 17 
Anhurmonic oscillator. 613 


Anti-commutator. 451.453 
Anli-Hermitian operators. 483p 
Anti-linear operators. 441 
Approximation methods. 501 n 
Archetypal problem, of quantum 
mechanics. 538 
Astronomical unit. 45 
Astrophysics. 45p 
Asymmetric potential. 255. 614 
Asymmetric square .veil. 365 
Asymptotic conditions. 299 
for the potential step. 306 
Asymptotic form: 

of differential equation. 387 
Asymptotic limit, in the solution of 
differential equations. 386 
Asymptotic region. 279. 354 
Atom, natural width. 527 
Atomic clocks. 312 
Atomic units. 330 
Attenuation constant. 297 

Bands, diffraction. 26 
Barrier penetration. 317 
Barrier potential. 312 (aw also Potential 
barrier) 

Basis set. 470. 471 

Beam. 297. 307 

Bessel functions. 427p 

Bessel-Parseval relationship. 121. 125 

Bela decay, 17 

Binding energy. 327. 361 

Bistable potential. 364 

Black-body radiation. 22. 45p 

Bohr. Niels. 40-42 


Bohr Institute. 40 
Bohr model of the atom. 7. 19 
Bohr radius. 434 
Boltzmann. Ludvig. 23 
Boltzmann constant. 23. 46 
Boole. George. 160 
Boolean algebra. 160 
Bom. Max. 159 

Bom interpretation. 69-70. 85. 133 
for continuous eigenvalues. 555 
for the hexalriene molecule. 564 
of a collision. 288 

Bom-Oppenheimcr approximation. 380 
Bound and continuum stales, summary of 
properties. 280 
Bound orbit (classical). 282 
Bound-state eigenfunction: 
parity. 367. 373 
uniqueness of. 371 
Bound states. 279 
boundary conditions, 354 
number of in a well. 344-45 
properties of eigenfunctions. 280. 370 
Boundary conditions. 75. 187. 244 
on the Airy equation. 418 
for bound stales. 354 
for continuum states. 354 
and curvature. 362 
for the expanding square well. 569n 
for a linear potential. 415 
in one dimension. 193 
in three dimensions. 194 
Boundary of a region. 355 
Box. expanding. 568 
Box. particle in a. 16. !42p (aw also 


NOTE: This index lists only major entries lor each item. Page numbers followed by an r contain reference to further inlorntalion about 
the item: those followed by an n contain important information about the item in a footnote: and those followed by a p refer to a problem 
concerning the item. 


660 Index 



Infinite square well) 

Bra, 446n 

Brakei. Dirac. 504. 54() n 
instructions. 445 
properties table. 446 
Branch diagram. 599 

Calculus, fundamental theorem of. 203 

Campbell. Ramsey. 99 

Carlsberg Brewery, 40 

Cartesian coordinates. 99 

Causality: 

in classical physics. 6 
in quantum physics. 228. 565 
Center of symmetry. 254 
Change in a quantum state, time for. 525 
Characteristic equations. 458n 
Characteristic length. 297 
Characteristic value. 458n 
Chopped beam. 115 
Clarke. Arthur C.. 21 
Classical limit. 94p. 114. 170. 171 
of the infinite square well. 272 
of the SHO. 402 
and statistical quantities. 172 
time-development of position and 
momentum. 522 

Classical oscillation frequency. 375 
Classical physics. 20 
relationship to quantum physics. 523 
Classical probability density. 378 
of the SHO. 377 
Classical turning points. 355-56 
for the linear potential. 416 
of the SHO. 376 
Classically allowed region. 294 
continuous potential. 355 
general solution in. 295 
qualitative behavior of wave function 
359 

Classically forbidden region, 294 
continuous potential. 355 
general solution in. 297 
qualitative behavior of wave function 
359 

Closure. 466n 
definition, 474 

Coherent quasi-classical states. 404n 
Coherent stale of the SHO. 412 
Collapse of the stale function. 597 
Collision: 

Bom interpretation. 288 
classical. 284 
clastic. 284 
quantum. 284-85 
in three dimensions. 318 
wave-packet description of, 286 
Collision experiment. 69. 115 '>'> | 715 
233. 285 

in nuclear physics. 346 
probability How in. 221 
Collision theory, classical. 21. 25 
Collision time. 286 
- Column-vcctorr505~— 

Commutation relations: 
and simultaneous eigenstates. 491 
for ,r anti />. table. 499 
Commutativity: 
of functions, 165 
of operators. 164 
physical consequences. 495 


of real numbers. 161 
Commutator. I65n. 534p 
algebra of. 497 
annihilation. 493 
definition. 439 
evaluation of. 496 
of position and momentum. 498 
and simultaneous eigenstates. 491 
table of relations. 497 
Commuting operators. 164 
and simultaneous eigenfunctions. 492 
Compatible observables. 511 
simultaneous measurement of. 602. 611 
Complete set expansion lor continuous 
eigenvalues. 494 

Complete set of commuting operators 
461 

Completed square. 316 
Completeness. 485p 
and the commutator, 493 
for continuous eigenvalues note. 469 
of eigenfunctions of a Hermitian 
operator. 466. 469 
of a set of operators. 461 
and simultaneous eigenstates. 492 
Complex harmonic wave. 104 
normalization integral. 106 
phase velocity. 107 

Complex nature of wave function 55 59 
99 

Complex numbers. 450n 

Complex variables. 87r 

Complimentary observables. 41. I29n 

Compton. Arthur H.. 25 

Concave function. 358 

Conlluem hypergeometric function. 434p 

Conservation laws. 513 

in classical physics. 51 Ir 
and the Correspondence Principle. 515 
Conservation of energy. 518 
in quantum mechanics. 262 
Conservation of parity. 530. .532r 
Conservation of probability. 201 
Conservative forces. 4n 
Conservative system. 185 
and stationary states. 240 
total energy of. 146 
Conserved observable. 533p 
in classical physics. 514-15 
and constants of the motion. 519 
in quantum physics. 514 
Constant of the motion. 243n. 511,53.5p 
in classical physics. 51 Ir 
and conserved quantities, 519 
and quantum numbers. 513 
review. 580 

and simultaneous eigenfunctions. 512 
and simultaneous measurement. 513 
lime dependence. 581 
Continuity conditions. 302 
finite square well. 323. 325 
Continuous eigenvalue. 459 
Continuous function. 78 

Continuous potential, regions-olV-355- 

Continuous spectra. 555-56 
Continuum stale. 243n. 274. 280. 284n 
boundary conditions. 3.54 
eigenfunction. 290-91. 354 
interpretation of eigenfunction. 304 
Convergence of iterates. 335-36 
Convergence of operator expansions, 442 
Convex function. 358 


Coordinate systems. I46r 
Copenhagen Interpretation. 42. 69 73 
524. 618 

Correspondence Principle. 11. 347p. .520. 
535p 

and conservation laws. 515 
definition. 169 
for the SHO. 403 
statistical quantities. 519 
and wave packets. 114 
Covalent bond. 380 
Cramer. John G.. 590 
CRAY 9000. 227 
Cropper. William H.. 68 
Cross section. 548 
Cross section, differential. 3|8 
CSCO. 461 

Curvature. 358-59. 364 
and energy. 362 
local. 359n 
and nodes. 364 
in problem solving. 256 
and quantization. 362 

d’Alembert ratio test. 390. 394n 
Damped harmonic oscillator. 375 
da Vinci. Leonardo. 26 
Davisson. C. J.. 39 
de Beauregard. Oliver Costa, 40 
de Broglie. Prince Louis Victor Pierre 
Raymond. 36. 40r 
biography. 37 
equations. 14. 37 
wavelength. 47p. 278 
de Broglie-Einstein equations. 39 
de Broglie relations. 102. 128. 243 
Decay constant. 297 
Degenerate eigenvalue. 460 
Degenerate energy. 248 
Density matrices. 593n 
Derivatives of operators. 444 
Descartes. Rene. 2 
Detector. 288n. 308 
energy resolution. 549n 
Determinism. 2. 5 
Diatomic molecules. 380 
properties table. 38] 
vibrations of. 278 
Differential equation. 229r. 295r 
complex, oscillatory solutions. 295 
for the Hcnnite polynomials. 431 
real, exponential solutions. 297 
real, oscillatory solutions. 295 
solved via eigenfunction expansion. 

566 

Differentiating exponents, rules for. 191 
Diffraction: 
grating. 49p 
pattern. 21. 55 

single-slit experiment. 26. 47p 
Dihippo force center. 380 
Dimensionless constants, 315 
-Dipole-moment function. 383 
Dirac. P. A. M. 136. 580 
Dirac brakei. 444 
properties table. 446 
Dirac Delta function, I08r. 459n 5()5n 
522n. 557 
and closure. 474 

Dirac Delta function normalization. 459. 

557 


Index 661 



Dirac notation. 440. 444. 450. 4X3p. 540n 
Discrete spectra. 555-56 
Dispersion. 66-67 
Dispersion relation. 110 
free particle. 113 
relativistic. 103 
Distinct solutions. 37In 
Disiributivily. 162 
DNA. 57 

Double-hump potential. 429 
Double-slit experiment. 28-34. 35n. 56 
actual experiments. 32. 46 
particle explanation. 31-32 
probability waves. 52 
quantitative theory of. 29 
spots in. 33 

wave explanation. 33-34 
Double-valuer! function. 78 
Duality. 20 
Dummy indices, 54In 
Diiker. H.. 32 

e-F > scattering. 548 
Earth, radius of. 45 
Eddington. Sir Arthur. 7 
Ehrenfest, Paul. 520 
Ehrenfest's theorem, 520. 534p 
Eigenfunction. 440 
bound state properties. 370 
of a Hermitian operator (orthogonality). 

466 

normalization of. 465 
Eigenfunction expansion. 540. 545. 562 
general form. 470 
Eigenstate. 460. 463. 488 
delinilion. 460 
evolution of. 535 
expectation value. 463 
and measurements. 462. 463 
simultaneous. 461 
uncertainty. 463 
Eigenvalue. 173. 245. 440 
continuous. 458-59. 550 
delinilion. 458 
degenerate. 460 
discrete. 458 
non-degenerate. 460 
real nature of. 464 

Eigenvalue equation. 244. 440. 458. 481 r 
cornucopia of. 459 
for a pure momentum slate. 152 
Eikonal approximation. 35 
Einstein. Albert. 21. 520 
and dc Broglie waves. 36 
Electricity and magnetism, classical 
theory. 53 

Electromagnetic radiation. 21 
Electromagnetic waves (transmission and 
reflection of). 293n 
Electron. 21 

Electron, valence. 45. 345 
Electron detector. 31. 54X 
~ Electron gun. 31 
Electron interference. 53. 57 
Electron microscope. 34. 45p 
Electron multiplier. 2X5 
Electron scattering. 21. 548 
Electronic circuits, fast switching. 313 
Electronic states of molecules. 382 
Energy: 

conservation of. 518 


and curvature. 362 
Energy eigenstate. 461. 539 
Energy equation. 185 
Energy llux. in diffraction. 27 
Energy information (table of). 567 
Energy-level diagram. 253 
Energy measurement. 257. 566. 596 
Energy-momentum equation: 
non-relativislic. 47p 
relativistic. 38. 47p 
Energy operator. 184 
for the SHO. 157 

Energy probability amplitude. 547. 551. 

562. 565-66 

Energy representation. 545. 565. 577 
and position representation. 564 
Energy spectrum. 253 
Energy-time inequality. 15. 291. 524. 

527. 530r 

Energy-time uncertainly principle (.«*<■ 
Energy-time inequality) 

Energy uncertainty. 509. 574 
for the SHO. 509 

Energy variable for the linear potential. 

417 

Ensemble. 8. 61. 85. 593 

for the classical probability. 377 
Ensemble average. 65(.«r also 
Expectation value) 

Ensemble measurement. 61. 69 
of commuting observables. 505 
of position. 62. 79 
Entropy (and Einstein's theory ot 
photons), 24 
Epistemology. 618 
Equation of motion, classical. 183 
Equivalent operators. I63n 
Evanescent wave. 3(H). 310 
Event. 54. 61 

Evolution. Schrodinger. 595 
Expanding square well. 568. 586p 
boundary conditions. 569 
energies table. 573 
energy-level diagram. 570 
statistical quantities. 574 
Expansion coefficient. 267. 540 
for a non-stalionary stale. 563 
of the wave function. 470 
Expansion observable. 542. 556. 562. 577 
Expansion of the wave function. 491. 494 
Expectation value: 

of arbitrary operator. 166 
delinilion. 80 
in an eigenstate. 463 
evolution with time. 517 
expansion form. 541 
of momentum. 153 
of position. 66 
rate of change. 517 
simple calculation of. 544 
of a stationary stale. 259-60 
time derivative of. 517 
time development of. 516 
E xperi mental uncertainties. 591 
Exploding exponentials. 299. 394 
Exponential functions, real. 297 
Exponential operator. 443. 484p 

Fermat's principle. 37 
Feynman. Richard P.. 12. 30n. 617 
Field emission of electrons. 312 


Finite square well: 

classically-forbidden regions. 94p 
continuum states. 342p 
curvature arguments. 360 
qualitative solution. 322 
simultaneous eigenstates of. 461 
symmetric: bound states of. 300.319 
transmission coefficient. 342p 
variation in potential strength. 332 
Flatland. 144 

Flow velocity, classical. 218 
Fluid flow, classical. 223r 
Fluxes. 304 

Force, expectation value of. 522 
Force constant. 375. 382 
Forced harmonic oscillator. 375 
Fourier. Jean Baptiste Joseph. 119 
Fourier analysis. 116 
Fourier integral. 120. 137r. 494n 
Fourier series. I37r. 468. 469 
complex. 120 
cosine. 118 
real. 117 
sine. 118 

Fourier transform. 121, 579r 

and eigenfunction expansion. 558 
and parity. 579 
Franck. James. 19. 548 
Franck-Hertz experiment. 19. 548 
Free particle. 98. 559. 594 
measurements. 534 
momentum and energy uncertainties. 

615 

stationary states. 248 
Free-particlc propagator. 235 
Frequency. 102 
angular. 375 
classical oscillation. 375 
natural. 375 

Fundamental problem of quantum 
mechanics. 538 

Fundamental theorem of integral calculus. 
203 

Fusion of hydrogen nuclei. 341 

Gamma-ray microscope. 9n 
Gaussian functions: 
integrals table. 398 

Gaussian wave function. 76. I25r. 14Ip. 
207. 209. 234 

amplitude function for. 123. 127 
HEP lor. 213 

momentum uncertainty. 213 
position and momentum information 
table. 134 

position uncertainty. 211 
probability current density. 210. 234p 
properties ot. 233p 
spreading of. 206 
TDSE for. 192 
time-dependent. 207-8 
uncertainties in. 129 
width of. 125. 211 
Gaussian wave packet (in collision 
experiment). 287 

Gedanken experiment for quantization. 
49p 

Generalized Born Interpretation. 543. 
545. 550. 555. 577 
for mixed spectra. 559 
Generalized Uncertainly Principle (GUP). 
129. 506r. 591 


662 Index 



consequences table. 510 
and energy-lime inequality. 527 
Generating function. Hermite. 451 
Germer. L. H.. 39 
Ghost waves. 86 
Gibraltar. Rock of. 291 
Gilbert and Sullivan. 33. 150. 175. IXI. 

189. 375. 540 
Gillespie. Daniel T.. 524 
Global phase factor. 77. 197, 259. 371. 
554 

Gnu. 9lp 
God. 8 

Golden Rule of Operator Algebra, lirst. 
443 

Golden Rule of Operator Algebra, 
second. 444 

Grnm-Schmidt orthogonalization. 468 
Graphing Stale Functions. 59 
Green’s function. 235p 
Green's Theorem. 2()3r 
Group theory. 382 
Group velocity, 205 
definition. 113 

three-dimensional wave packet. 115 

Half-infinite linear potential. 414 
Hamilton’s equation (classical). I83r. 
520n 

Hamilton's formulation (classical). I57r 
Hamiltonian: 
classical. 157. 520 
in one dimension. 185 
and the parity operator. 480-81 
in three dimensions. 186 
Hamiltonian eigenfunction (separation of 
spatial variables). 276 
Hamster, quantum. 49 
Harmonic oscillator: 
damped. 375 
forced. 375 
simple. 375 
Harmonic wave: 
complex. 104 
real. 102 
Hartree. 331 
Hats. I(M). 244 
Hawking. Steven. 2 
Heisenberg. Werner: 
on language. 42 
on probability waves. 86 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle (HUP). 
9. 10. 14. 20. 15—I7p. 129. 227. 
505 

and the classical limit. 170 
and commutators, 165 
and complimcntarity. 41 
derived from the GUP. 506 
for a Gaussian. 213 
for macroscopic particles. 170 
for the SHO, 410 
and simultaneous eigenstates, 490 
—for-slalionary-stal es r 257 — 
verification of. 167 
and wave packets. 114 
Herbert. Nick. 86 
Hermite. Charles. 388 
Hermite equation. 388 
Hermite functions. 388. 393 
Hermite polynomial. 394. 398 
properties of. 430 


table of. 397 

Hermite Series, convergence of. 393 
Hcrmilian conjugate, 456n 
Hennitian operators. 204. 446 
adjoint of. 456 
combinations table. 452 
and conservation laws. 515 
eigenvalue properties table. 476 
eigenvalues are real. 464 
functions of. 451 
functions table. 451 
linear combinations of. 453-54 
linear independence of eigenfunctions. 
465 

product of. 452 
that commute. 502 
Hemiiticity. 157. I77p. 204 
definition. 447 
physical significance of. 449 
Hertz. Gustav. 19. 548 
Hertz. Heinrich. 19. 21 
Hcxatriene molecule. 27Ip. 550. 564 
Hidden variable theories. 524r. 619r 
Hilbert space. 58. 136. 472n 
Hinton. Charles Howard. I(X) 
Hippopotami. 380 
History of quantum mechanics. 42r 
Hoffmann. Banesh. 25 
Homogeneity: 

Iree-particle wave functions. 101 
of free space. 99. 101 
Homogeneous equation. 197. 244 
definition. 195 
Hook. the. 301 
Hooke’s Law. 375 
Huygens's Principle. 27 
Hydrogen atom. 494 
model of. 433p 

Hydrogen molecule. 4Xp. 283, 381 
Hyperbolic functions, 297. 316 

Ideal measurement. 603. 608. 6l3n 
Identical systems. 6. 61 
Identity operator. 165. 449 
Incident llux. 304 
Incompatible observables, 41. 510 
measurement of. 612-13 
Index of refraction. 293n 
Induced mutation. 595 
Inlinilc-fold degeneracy. 478n 
Infinite square well. 9()p. 489 
curvature arguments, 362 
and the Generalized Born 
Interpretation. 564 
measurement problem. 620 
momentum uncertainty. 166 
non-stalionary stale. 232p. 266. 270p 
stale functions. 9Ip. 93p 
summary. 320 
Infinitesimal. 161 n 
Inhomogeneous equation. 195 
Initial conditions. 102. 187, 565 

—for-n-stalionary-staUh-242- 

Integral, tables of. 553r 
Integrated probability. 71. 200-202. 222. 
455 

Integrated probability density. 73 
Integration by parts. 44Xn 
Interactions, weak and otherwise. 533 
Interference: 
constructive. 106 


destructive, 107 
of harmonic waves. 106 
pattern to diffraction pattern. 28 
Intermediate quantities. 315. 328, 385 
Intcmuclcar separation. 381 
Inverse Fourier transform. 121. 579 
Inversion. 254. 373n 
in the ammonia molecule. 312 
Ionic bond. 380 
Ionization potential. 327 
iterative solution (of transcendental 
equations). 335-36 
accuracy. 336 
table. 336 

Jonssun, C.. 32 

K-meson. 532 
Kaon. 532 
Kernel, 456p. 485 
Kel. 446n 

Kinetic energy operator. 202. 454 
Hcrmiticity of. 452 
and the parity operator. 479 
various representations. I78p 
Kinetic energy: 
non-relalivistic. 38. 158. 163 
relativistic, 38 
Kirchhoff. G. R.. 22 
Knowledge, limitations on. 537 
Kronecker della function. 473 
Kummer’s equation. 434p 
Kurlbaum. F.. 22 

Lagrange, Joseph-Louis. 160 
Lagrangian. 157 

Language (in quantum mechanics). 42 
Laplace. Pierre Simon, marquis de. 227 
Laplace's demon, 227 
Laplacian. 186. 245 
Las Vegas. 90p 
Latent observable. 147 
Laws of motion: 
classical. 147 
quantum {see TDSE) 

Lee. T-D. 476. 531 
Leibniz. Gottfried Wilhelm. 160 
Leibniz's Rule. I92n 
Length variable. 434 
Light intensity, 53 
corpuscular theories of. 21 
nature of, 25 
Linear algebra. 136. 437 
Linear equation. 195. 244 
Linear independence. 371, 465 
definition, 392 
Linear momentum. 576 
classical. 146-48 (Sir also Momentum, 
linear) 

Linear momentum operator: 
eigenfunctions of. 459 

-Hermitieily-ofr449- 

linearity of. 441 
Linear operator. 175. 441 
general form. I96n 
Linear potential. 354. 414 
commutator for. 498 
eigenfunctions. 416 
general eigenfunction. 418 
momentum amplitude problem. 435 


Index 663 



Linear potential {amt.) 
qualitative solution of. 416 
stationary-state energies. 419 
Linearity. 440 

Linearly independence. 244n 

Local curvature. 359n 

Local decay constant. 361 

Local wavelength. 361 

Local wave number. 361 

Logarithmic derivative. 242. 326. 350p 

Loientz. H. A.. 226 

Lorentz. Hendrik. 36 

Lorentzian wave function. 230 

Luminescence spectra. 339 

Magnetic Held strength, units of. 4l4n 
Magnetospeetroscopy. 415 
Many-worlds interpretation. 524r. 619r 
Margenau. Henry. 227 
Mars, wave packet for. 234p 
Maser, ammonia beam. 312 
Mass-energy equivalence. 50p 
Master of Square Wells. 333 
Mathematical data. 87r 
Mathematical induction. 499 
Matrix elements. 444. 502 
Matrix mechanics. 159n. 503r 
Matrix representation. 503-4 
Matter wave. 37-39. 39r. 48p. 54 
Maxwell. James Clerk. 20 
wave theory of light. 21 
Mean square deviation. 66 
in Fourier analysis. 119 
Mean value. 65-66 
of a conserved quantity. 514 
Measurable quantities. 148 
Measurement. 7. 61.90p. 533p. 592. 593 
of an arbitrary observable. 599 
deducing the slate function. 553 
definition. 591 
and eigenstates. 462-63 
ideal. 603 

non-stationary state. 596 
and operators. 532 
possible outcomes of. 547. 550 
problem of. 590 

Measurement theory. 591. 596. 618. 6l9r 

Measurement lime. 591 

Member of an ensemble. 71. 593 

Mercedez-Benz. 47 

Mctastable stale. 28 

Method of power series. 385 

Methylene: 

stationary state energies table. 429 
vibrations in. 428p 
Microscope, resolving power of. 44 
Millikan. R. A.. 25 
Minimal disturbance. 608 
Minimum energy: 

in a stationary stale. 257 
Minimum uncertainty wave packet. 129. 

213 

—iVl i xed speelrai-555—56r-559— 

Mixed stale. 68. 593n 
Mixture coefficients. 267. 565 
Model potential. 277. 354 
Molecular vibrations. 380. 383. 422p. 

423p, 425p. 432p. 544. 614 
Mollenstcdl. G.. 32 
Momentum: 
classical. 8. 520 


expectation value of. 134. 153 
free particle, expectation value. 559 
information table. 560 
linear. 4 

measurement of. 4 
photon. 14 

probabilistic information about. 134 
uncertainty in. 9. 134 
of wave packet. 112 
Momentum amplitude {See Momentum 
probability amplitude) 

Momentum extractor. 151 
Momentum function: 

normalization integral. 108 
Momentum measurement. )38p 
Momentum operator. 151 
derivation of. 176p 
eigenfunctions of. 558 
three-dimensional. 152 
Momentum probability amplitude. 130. 
475. 577 

Bom interpretation of. 134 
definition. 130. 133 
as Fourier transform of wave function. 
131 

lor a free particle. 558 
for the linear potential. 435 
for the SHO. 434 
time-dependent. 133 
Momentum probability density. 559 
Momentum representation. 136. 174 
Momentum-space amplitude. 494n 
Momentum uncertainty. 129 
for a Gaussian. 213 
of the SHO. 407-8 
Monotonic function. 358 
Morse. Philip. 278 

Morse potential. 278. 354. 382. 454. 554 

Mosquito (model). 380 

Motion: 

in classical physics. 181 
in quantum physics. 182 
Multiple collisions. 285 
Multiple measurements. 611 

of incompatible observables. 612 
Muon. 341 
Murphy. Robert. 160 


Natural frequency. 375 
Natural lifetime. 528 
tables of. 529 
Natural width. 527-28 
Neutron crystal diffraction. 47p 
Newman. James R., 42 
Newton. Roger. 62 

Newton's Second Law. 3. 183. 187. 375. 
511. 519 


quantum mechanical analog of. 521 
Nodes, 251. 321. 364-65 
and curvature. 364 
and parity. 367 
Non-commuialivity. 439 


—Nome 


Non-degenerate eigenvalue. 460 
Non-degenerate energy. 248. 373 
Non-linear equation. 195 
Non-linear operator. 442 
Non-local model of reality. 619r 
Non-local operator. 485p 
Noil-stationary stale. 263. 585p 
average energy. 542 


calculating uncertainties for. 544 
eigenfunction expansion of. 562 
energy information table. 567 
general form. 266 
preparation of. 587 
Normal mode of vibration. 382 
Nonmailable function. 74 
Normalization: 

absolute versus relative. 63 
of a plane wave. 108 
of wave functions. 73, 197 
Normalization condition. 64-65. 73. 280 
for the SHO. 388 
lime independence of. 74 
Normalization constant. 76 
for the finite square well, 326 
for the SHO. 399 

Normalization integral. 73. 197. 23Ip 
expansion form, 547 
for the SHO. 75 
time independence of. 197 
Nostril. 47p 
Nuclear decay. 72 
Nuclear motion, in a molecule. 381 
Nuclear potential energy. 345 
Number of bound states. 344 
Numerical integration, 346 

Observable, generic. 82. 156 
Observables: 

in classical physics. 144-45 
compatible. 510. 601 
dictionary of. 173 
fundamental equations table. 557 
incompatible. 9. 510 
uncertainly in. 9 
Observer. 5. 8 

Observer-observed interaction. 592 
Old quantum theory. 20 
One-dimensional systems, 58 
Bom interpretation for. 70 
One-electron atom, model of. 433p 
One-to-one correspondence. 373 
Operational definitions. 148 
Operator, linear. 175 
general form. 196 
Operator algebra. 161. I77p. 5(H) 
rules of. 443—44 
Operator difference, 439 
Operator equations. 440 
Operator functions. 442 
algebra of. 497 
mean value of. 545 
Operator mechanics. 159 
Operator products. 162. 163 
Operator sum. 439 
Operators. 438. 533p 

adjoint, properties table. 457 
anti-Hermitian. 483 
anti-linear. 441 
commutativity of. 439 
commuting. 164 
commu ting, table of. 440 
definition. 160 
derivative of. 444 
Hcnnilian: 
adjoint of. 456 
combinations table. 452 
eigenfunctions of. 466 
functions table. 451 
linear combinations of. 453-54 


664 Index 




product of. 452 
properties table. 476 
Hermilicity of. 446-47 
identity. 449 

integral representation of. 485 
linear. 441 

mathematical properties of. I74r. 481 r 
and measurement. 532 
momentum table. 438 
non-Hermitian. 448 
non-linear. 442 
non-local. 485 
positive definite. 483 
sampler of. 160 
table of. 439 
lime-reversal. 486 
Orbit, classical. 10. 181. 282 
Orbital angular momentum: 
in the H atom. 494 
operator. 492 

Ordinary differential equation: 
general form. 194 
uniqueness of solution. 371 
Origin, choice of. I(M) 

Orthogonality. 468. 479 
definition. 467 

in determining probability amplitudes. 
563 

eigenfunctions of a Hermilian operator. 
466 

in Fourier series. 468 
Orthogonality integral. 265. 473 
Orthogonality relations: 

for sine and cosine. 119 
Oscillation frequency. 243 
Oscillator, macroscopic. 48p 
Oscillatory function. 358 
Oscillatory plane wave. 295 
Overlap integral, 444. 467. 473 

Pagels. Heinz R.. 3 
Pair annihilation. 50p. 2(K)r 
Parity. 81. 254. 255. 603n 
of bound-state eigenfunctions. 367 
consequences for bound-state 
eigenfunctions. 373 
conservation of. 518. 530 
ddinite. 154 

and derivatives. 155. 405 
eigenfunctions of a symmetric 
potential. 322 
in Fourier analysis. 118 
measurement of. 602. 605. 609 
and nodes. 367 
for the SHO. 388 
of trigonometric functions. 320 
Parity invariance. 530 
Parity operator. 481. 484p. 518 
eigenfunctions of. 459. 478 
eigenvalue equation. 478 
and the Hamiltonian. 481 
Hermilicity of. 476 

—and the kinetic-en ergy - o perato r. 4 79 — 
linearity of. 476 
and symmetric potentials. 479 
Panial differential equation (general 
font)). 195 
Particle: 

macroscopic. 20 
microscopic. 20. 42 
properties of. 3 


slate of. 3 
trajectory of. 4 
Particle, quantum. 181 
Particle in a box: 
boundary conditions. 249 
ground-state. 189 
momentum. 252 
spatial functions. 253 
stationary slates. 250 
superposition state. 198 
Pauli. Wolfgang. 41. 226 
Pauli Exclusion Principle. 271 
Penetration, barrier. 311. 317 
Period, classical. 377 
Period of a function. 117 
Periodic function. 116 
Phase constant: 

of a Hamiltonian eigenfunction. 369 
of SHO. 375 
Phase, relative. 554 
Phase space. 4 
Phase velocity. 107. 205 
Philosophy, mechanistic, 227 
Philosophy of quantum mechanics. 229r 
Photoelectric effect. 24 
Photon. 24 

and de Broglie equations, 38 
Compton's verification of. 25 
and the double-slit experiment. 30 
energy. 38 
momentum. 38 
Physical laws. 530 

Physically admissible function. 57. 74 
Piccewise-constani potential. 369 
bound/conlinuuni states table. 338 
in collision experiment. 284 
definition. 276 

procedure for finding eigenfunctions. 

292 

properties table. 296 
stationary states. 343p 
validity of. 277 

Piecewise continuous function. 192n 
and Fourier Analysis. 116 
Pig. clay. 22 
Planck. Max. 22. 226 
Planck oscillators. 48p 
Planck's constant. 9. 23. 24 
Plane wave, oscillatory. 295 
Plane wave model. 224 
Poisson bracket. 5l7n. 523n 
Pollen grain. 47p 
Polyatomic molecule, 382 
Pooh. Winnie the. 243 
Position: 

classical (rate of change), 520-21 
mean value, expansion form. 543 
Position operator: 
definition. 156 
eigenfunctions of, 459. 557 
Hermilicity of. 449 
momentum representation. 178 
table. 438 

—Posilion-probabilily-62- 

conservation of. 201 
Position probability amplitude. 56. 59 
various representations. 475 
Position probability density. 65 
Position representation. 136. 173 
and the energy representation. 564 
Position uncertainly. 68n. 129 
of a Gaussian. 211-12 


for the SHO. 406. 509 
Positive-definite operators. 483p 
Positron. 50. 200r 

Postulates of quantum mechanics. I55r 
first. 58 
fourth. 185 
second. 70 
third. 158 

Potential barrier. 312 
continuity conditions table. 314 
relleclion coefficient. 316 
transmission coefficient, 316-17 
Potential energy. 98 
nuclear. 345 
of the SHO. 375 

Potential energy operator (Hermilicity 
of). 452 

Potential step. 297. 3(H). 303 
eigenfunction table. 307 
general current density form. 308-9 
general eigenfunction form. 307-8 
probability current density. 308 
reflection and transmission coefficients. 
305 

reflection and transmission 
probabilities. 309 
Potential strength parameter. 328 
for the linear potential. 417 
for the SHO. 386 

Power-series expansion (in evaluating 
operator functions). 442 
Power series solution of Hcrmite 
equation, 389 

Precise uncertainty principle. 129 
Principle of Complimentarity. 40 
Principle of superposition. 60. 232p. 565 
and linearity. 198. 441 
and wave packets. 135 
Probabilistic information. 65 
Probabilities. 90p 
when to add. 607 
Probability: 

pointwise conservation of. 262 
Probability, pointwise conservation of. 
221 

Probability amplitude. 70. 557 
Probability current density: 
alternate forms. 217 
definition, 217 
interpretation of. 220 
for the potential step. 308 
in a stationary state. 262 
summary table. 220 
in three dimensions. 222-23 
Probability density. 56. 64 
classical, of the SHO. 377 
of a Gaussian. 208. 211 
Probability distribution. 54 
Probability How. 214n. 216 
in three dimensions. 262 
Probability fluid, 214. 222 
Probability flux {See Probability current 
density) 

—Probability-theo ry — 5 4 . - 6 1-63— 
Probability waves. 55 
and Fourier analysis. 116 
Problem of measurement. 617 
Problem solving: 

strategics for bound and continuum 
states. 303 

strategics for piccewise-constani 
potentials. 292 


Index 665 





Problem solving {rout.) 
tricks. 349 

Projection of the wave function. 470. 

473. 492. 540. 566 
Proof by contradiction. 371 
Propagator. 234p 
Proper value. 458n 
Properties of a particle: 
extrinsic. 4 
intrinsic. 3 
momentum. 475 
Pseudomass, photon. 50 
Pseudo-normalization integral. 108 
Pure momentum function. 107. 130. 151 
example. 290 

probability current density. 218 
review. 304 
TDSE for. 190 
Pure stale. 593n 

Poschl-Teller potential hole. 354 

Quadrature approximation to a 
potential. 278 
Quanta: 

Einstein's concept of. 24 
Planck's concept of. 23 
Quantization. 19 
of angular momentum. 49p 
and curvature, 362 
and the de Broglie equations. 39 
of energy, 247 

energy of the finite square well, 325 
of the radiation field. 24 
and uncertainty. 258 
Quantum arbitrariness. 77. 259 
Quantum collision. 286r 
Quantum epistemology. 524 
Quantum mechanics. 2 
essays on. 43r 
formulations. 88r 
general problem. 237 
interpretations of. 88r 
popularizations. 43r 
Stone Age of. 40r 
Quantum numbers. 252. 322n 
and constants of the motion. 513 
Quantum physics: 

archetypal problem. 538 
elements summarized. 525 
relationship to classical physics. 523 
review of. 5.39 
Quantum states. 59 
Quantum uncertainties. 591 
Quantum-well heterostructurc. 338 
Quarks, 533 

R-matrix method. 350 
Racquetball. 68 
Radiant solar llux. 45p 
Radiation density function (aw 
Rayleigh-Jcans Law) 

Radiative energy density (Planck's 
formula for). 22-23 
Random chance. 73. 618 
Rate equation: 
for probability How, 217 
lor a stationary state. 262 
Rationalized Planck's constant. 102 
Rayleigh-Jcans law. 45p 
Reactor design, 312 
Real harmonic wave. 102 


Reality. 5 

Rectangular coordinates. 99. 476 
Recurrence relation. 389 
for the llermitc equation. 392 
lor Hcrmite polynomials. 431 
Reduction of the wave packet. 597 
Reference frame. 99 
Rcllcctcd llux. 304 

Rellected wave (for the potential step). 
307 

Rellected wave packet. 288 
Reflection: 

of a macroscopic particle. 284 
of a microscopic particle. 284 
Reflection coefficient (Sw also Reflection 
probability): 
interpretation of. 304 
for the potential barrier. 316 
of your car. 347 

Reflection probability, general form, 309 
Reflection probability amplitude, 308 
Region, asymptotic. 354 
Region, detector. 308 
Region, source. 308 
Regions. 292 
classification table. 294 
for a continuous potential. 355 
of the linear potential. 416 
Relative phase of the wave function. 554 
Relativity, special theory. 39 
Representations. 565 
energy. 545 
momentum. 136. 174 
position. 136. 173 
position and energy. 564 
position and momentum table. 136. 

438 

of the probability amplitude. 475 
Resonance. 341. 350p 
Resonant magnetospectroscopy. 415 
Resonators. 23 
Rest mass. 38. 47p 
Retarded propagator. 234n 
Roots of transcendental equations. 329 
Rubens. H.. 22 

Rutherford model of the atom. 7 

Scalar product. 446n 
Scanning tunnelling microscope. 313 
Scattering amplitude. 318. 354 
Scattering slates. 274 
Scattering theory: 
in one dimension, 279 
in three dimensions. 318-19 
Schrodinger. Erwin. 10. I83r, 237 
Schrddingcr equation: 
derivation from de Broglie waves. 49p 
time-dependent. 78. 98. 228r. 280. 539. 
593n. 561 

time-independent. 243 
Segre. Emilio. 319. 530 
Selection rules. 345 
Self-adjoint operator. 456n 
Semi-classical analysis. 15 
Semiclassical interpretations of quantum 
mechanics. 6l9r 

Semiconductor devices. 339. 426p 
Separable solutions. 238 
Separation constant. 240 
Separation of variables. 239. 275 
Series expansions of functions, review of. 
389 


Servois. Francois Joseph. 160 
Sharp observables. 243 
Simple harmonic motion. 375 
in black-body radiation. 23 
simple harmonic oscillator. I6p. 59. 75. 
81. 92p. 93p. 23()p. 375-76. 407. 
434. 605 

average potential energy, 407 

classical (macroscopic). 375 

classical limit. 402 

classical turning points. 400 

coherent-state. 412 

commutators. 500 

commuting observables for. 494 

completeness of eigenfunctions, 470 

correspondence principle. 403 

eigenfunction (able. 399 

eigenstates table, 615 

energy and parity measurements. 606 

energy eigenstate. 466 

energy operator, 157 

energy quantization. 395 

expectation value. 405 

force on. 523 

general eigenfunctions. 398 
ground-state eigenfunction. 357 
Hamiltonian. 157. 163. 384 
Heisenberg Uncertainly Principle. 410 
integrals table. 406 
intermediate quantities table. 385 
kinetic energy, 408 
macroscopic. 379 
momentum amplitude. 434p 
momentum measurements, 578 
momentum uncertainty. 407-8 
non-slationary state, 411-12. 426p. 

471. 508. 542. 544. 578 
normalization constant, 398 
observ ables table. 408 
position uncertainty. 406 
potential energy. 375 
review. 583p 
sloshing states, 410 
solution plan, table, 385 
stale functions. 92p 
stationary states. 384 
stationary-state energies. 395. 398 
statistical quantities, 405 
time-dependent wave function. 399 
TISE. 384 
total energy. 146 
total energy, classical. 376 
truncated. 424p. 431 p 
uncertainties table. 408 
uncertainly products, 507 
Simultaneous eigenfunctions. 481.490 
and (he commutator. 491 
complete sets of. 492 
and constants of the motion. 512 
expansion of the wave function. 494 
Simultaneous eigenstate. 461. 489. 601 
of the Hamiltonian and the parity 
operator. 491 

Simultaneous measurements. 489 

of compatible observables. 601-2. 611 
of constants of the motion. 513 
of incompatible observables, 613 
Single-slit diffraction. 26 
quantitative theory of, 27 
Single-slit experiment. 594 
Single-valued function. 78 


666 Index 




Singularities in solution of differential 
equations. 386 
Skipping states. 4l4n 
Slope, rate of change in. 358 
Sloshing stale. 576. 587p 
Smoothly-varying function. 78 
Solcnoidal flow, 262 
Solid-state physics. 414 
Source region. 308 
Spatial functions. 245 
Spatial localization. 20. 59. 193 
of a wave packet. 110. 280 
Special functions. 386r 
Spectral distribution function. 110 
Spectrometer. 117 
Spectroscopy, 283. 527 
Spherical coordinates, 194. 433, 476 
Spherically symmetric potential. 194 
Spots, 595 

Square-integrable function. 73n 
Square well, 327 
asymmetric. 327. 347 
finite. 319 

infinite (.«■<* Infinite square well) 
one-dimensional. 16 
Standard deviation. 79. 83 
of a wave packet, 128 
Standing waves. 304. 272 
Slate: 

change of. 8 
in classical physics. 3 
preparation of. 597 
in quantum mechanics. 7 
trajectory. 4 
State function. 57 
interpretation of. 68, 88r. 89p 
normalization requirement, 290 
restrictions on. 78 
State vector. 58. 136 
Stationarity, 261 
Stationary phase condition. 110 
Stationary state. 237! 242, 539 * 

bound and continuum, 301 
conservation of energy. 262 
and conservative systems, 241 
continuum note, 243 
energy information table. 567 
energy properties. 257. 259-60 
general properties of. 259 
as idealization. 269 
initial condition, 242 
probability current density. 262, 270p 
rale equation. 262 
summary table. 263 
TISE for. 244 
wave function, 238. 270p 
Statistical ensemble. 61 
Statistical quantities. 61. 65. 82. 539 
and the GUP. 506 
for the expanded square well, 574 
of the SHO. 405 

for a simultaneous eigenstate. 489 
Steady slate. 262 
Stefan. J.. 22 

Stefan-Boltzmann constant. 45 
Stcfan-Boltzniann law, 45 
Step potential. 34Ip. 342p 
' superposition state. 304 
Sub-ensemble. 594 
Sun: 

diameter of. 45 
temperature of. 45p 


Superposition. 565 
in the double-slit experiment. 29. 
53-54 

and non-sialionary states. 264 
of plane waves. 108 
principle of. 59 
Superposition slate. 56. 198 
of the potential step. 304 
Surface Landau levels. 4l4n 
Symmetric potential. 254. 364. 373. 479 
and parity. 322 
parity operator for. 494 
Symmetrizntion of operators. 177 
Symmetry: 

consequences for bound-state 
eigenfunctions. 373 
in solution of the finite square well. 
321 

Symmetry arguments, 374 
Symmetry operation. 254 
Symmetry operators. 476 
System. 57 


r decay mode. 532 
Taylor series. 120. 140.431 
TDSE, 183. 185 (see also Schrbdinger 
equation) 

for a free particle. 189 
in three dimensions, 197. 275 
Terminator. 394 
Thermal equilibrium. 23 
D decay mode, 532 
()-t puzzle. 532 
Thompson, G. P., 21,39 
Thompson. J. J., 21. 25 
Three-dimensional systems (relation to 
one-dimensional systems), 275 ■' 

Time: 

interval, definition. 526 
measurement of. 591 
in quantum physics, 58. 525-26. 591. 
593n 

Time-dependent perturbation theory. 56In 
Time function, (in TISE). 242 
TISE (.vet* also Schrbdinger equation): 
one-dimensional. 276 
in three dimensions. 245 
Time-reversal. 486p 
Total energy: 

of a stationary slate. 243 
Total transmission, potential barrier. 317 
Trajectory. 3. 8. 20. 52. 511 
and the double-slit experiment, 35 
elimination of in quantum mechanics. 
35 

evolution of. 4 

Transcendental equations. 325 
energy of the finite square well. 328 
examples. 329 
graphical solution of, 329 
iterative solution. 335r 
iterative solution, table, 336 
numerical solution of. 34()r 
Transition. 269 
Transition intensities. 383 
Translation. 101 

Transmission (of a microscopic particle). 
284 

Transmission coefficient: 
for the finite square well. 342p 
interpretation of. 304 


for the potential barrier. 313. 315-17 
Transmission probability (general form). 

309 

Transmission probability amplitude. 308 

Transmitted flux. 304 

Transmitted wave packet. 288 

Travelling wave. 304 

Trigonometric functions, parity of, 320 

Truncation. 117 

Tunnel diodes, 313 

Tunnelling. 312, 319 

Two-step potential, 348 

Ultraviolet catastrophe. 46p 
Unbound stale. 279-80. 284n, 354 
Uncertainty principle. I37r, 530r 
in three dimensions, 129 
Uncertainty relation: 
energy-time. 15 
position-momentum. 9 
Uncertainly. 20, 535p 
of arbitrary operator. 166 
definition. 83 
in an eigenstate. 463 
energy. 574 
evaluating, 168 
and quantization, 258 
of a stationary state. 260 
and wave packets. 135 
Undulatory mechanics. 186 
Uniqueness (of bound-state 

eigenfunctions). 247, 371 
Units, table of, 226 

Vacuum electromagnetic field. 269 
Valence electron, 45, 345 
Variance. 66 
Vector in 9?'*. 472 

Velocity, in quantum mechanics. 149n 
Vibrations, molecular. 380. 422p. 423p, 
425p, 432p 

bending in methylene. 428p 
of the CO molecule. 554 
small-amplitude, 382. 423p 
Virial theorem. 409. 534 
Virtual state. 350p, 35lp 
Von Neumann. John. 590. 592. 618 

Wave (classical). 26. 44r. 278 
Wave equation, classical. 186 
Wave fronts, 21 
Wave function: 
bound state. 268 
complex nature of. 188. 193 
continuum state, 268 
Fourier transform of, 123 
one-dimensional. 58 
Wavelength. 102 

Wave mechanics. Schrbdinger. 186 
Wave number. 102. 297n 
for a classically allowed region. 295 
Wave packet. 109. 111-15. 190. 494n. 

559. 594 
center. 110 
complex nature of. 98 
construction of. 109. I39p 
and Correspondence Principle. 114 
envelope. 112 
Gaussian. 205 
general form. 109 


Index 667 



Wave packet (ami.) 
general properties. I77p 
group velocity. 113 
and the HL'P. 139p 
infinitely large. 291 
Martian. 234p 
momentum of. 111 
periodic. 410 
spreading. 205. 210 
standard deviation. 128 
in terms of momentum functions. 130 
in three dimensions. 115 
Wave-panicle duality. 7. 9. 20. 36. 44p. 

44r 


and complimcnturily. 41 
Witvides. 7. 42 
Weber's equation, 3X6 
asymptotic solution of. 3X7 
general solution. 3X7 
Weighting factors. 65. 82 
Weiner. Norhcrt. 159 
Well-behaved function. 469. 4X5 
Width: 

definitions. 121 
of a Gaussian. 211 
Wien. W. W.. 22 

Wien's law of black-body radiation. 
22-23 


Wintsey. Lord Peter. 98 
Winter. Rolf G.. 78 
WKB approximation. 33Xr 
Work-energy theorem, classical. 534 

X-ray scattering. 25 

Yang, C. N.. 476. 531 
Young. Thomas. 2X 

Zero of energy. 292n 
Zeros of the Airy function. 419 